
## SRT-squared

Here is a trend in modern finance:

1. Banks have a [fundamentally](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDMtMTAvc3RhcnR1cC1iYW5rLWhhZC1hLXN0YXJ0dXAtYmFuay1ydW4_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb30ffd62) [risky](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDUtMDQvbm9ib2R5LXRydXN0cy10aGUtYmFua3Mtbm93P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MTIyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYxMiZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Ba03e7e6b) [business](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDUtMDkvaXQtcy1uZXZlci10b28tbGF0ZS1mb3ItYmFua3MtdG8taGVkZ2U_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B89f5e854) model, borrowing short (by taking deposits) and lending long.
2. In some ways it would be nice if, instead of banks with risky short-term deposits, somebody else, somebody with long-term funding, did all the risky lending. Banks could take deposits (a risky funding model), and then invest them very safely; other investors could raise long-term equity funding (a safe funding model), and use it to make risky loans and investments. Loosely speaking, this is called “[narrow banking](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDQtMjAvYmFua2luZy1nZXRzLWEtYml0LW5hcnJvd2VyP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MTIyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYxMiZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9f124b66).”
3. And in fact, these days, there are regulatory and market pressures on banks to take fewer of the risks they have traditionally taken. There are stricter capital and liquidity requirements (so banks can’t fund their risky loans too much with risky deposits), and prudential pressures on banks to get out of their riskier businesses (proprietary trading, leveraged lending). The banks take less risk.
4. And in fact, these days, people do go out and raise safe long-term funding to take some of the risks that banks have traditionally taken, in part because those regulatory and market pressures have made banks a bit less willing to take them. Hedge funds and proprietary trading firms [now do some of the market-making functions](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDItMDcvaGVkZ2UtZnVuZHMtYXJlLWRlYWxlcnMtbm93P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MTIyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYxMiZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bae8ce124) that banks [used to do](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDUtMTEvYmxhY2tzdG9uZS1jYW4tYmUtdGhlLWJhbms_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf45e47e9). Private credit firms [now do](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMTEtMDIvdGhlLWJhbmtzLWFyZS13aGVyZS10aGUtbW9uZXktaXNuLXQ_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B84710d0b) a lot of the risky [balance-sheet lending](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMDEvYmFua3MtYXJlLXN0aWxsLXdoZXJlLXRoZS1tb25leS1pc24tdD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8393f705) that banks used to do. And banks now [routinely sell](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDMtMTkvYmFua3MtY2FuLWdldC1lbWlzc2lvbnMtb2ZmLXRoZS1ib29rcz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B5ea4b91b) some of their [credit risk](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDItMjkvYmFyY2xheXMtZGV1dHNjaGUtYmFuay1hcmUtYmFjay1pbnRvLWNyZWRpdC1kZXJpdmF0aXZlcz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B44a2eb3d) to hedge funds and other investors, essentially buying insurance from those firms against the risk that their loans will default.
5. Great! 
6. All these people with their long-term funds have a problem, though. The reason these businesses work, for banks, is _leverage_. If you are a bank doing a trade with $10 of shareholders’ equity and $90 of deposits, and the trade pays $2, that’s great: You pay roughly $0 to depositors, so that $2 is a 20% return on equity. But if you are a hedge fund doing that same trade with $100 of your own investors’ money, it’s not great: That $2 is a 2% return on equity.
7. What you want, if you are an investor with safe stable long-term funding doing these trades that banks used to do, is _leverage_. You want to borrow 90% of the money to do the trade, preferably cheaply, so that you can get a good return on equity for the people giving you that safe stable long-term funding.
8. Where can you borrow all that money?
9. Well, from banks, obviously. They have lots of money! They are in the business of making loans! It just makes sense.
10. This sort of takes us back to Step 1, doesn’t it? The risky business leaves the banking system and goes to people with long-term stable funding, but then it comes back into the banking system because those people lever up their bets with bank loans.

So we have [talked about](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDMtMDQvdHJhZGluZy1kZXNrcy10cmFkZS1sZXNzLWxlbmQtbW9yZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2bfe6a51) how banks’ trading divisions are increasingly in the business of _lending money_ to hedge funds and proprietary trading firms, who then do the market-making and trading functions that the banks used to do themselves. And we have [talked](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDYtMDMvZ2FtZXN0b3AtY29tZXMtcm9hcmluZy1iYWNrP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MTIyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYxMiZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bbdb6ccba) a [few](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMjcvc2lsaWNvbi12YWxsZXktaXMtb24tZHJ1Z3M_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb1fb7ade) [times](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDUtMDkvaXQtcy1uZXZlci10b28tbGF0ZS1mb3ItYmFua3MtdG8taGVkZ2U_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C89f5e854) about how private credit funds sometimes lever up their own investors’ money by getting financing from banks. The risky business itself — proprietary trading, financing leveraged buyouts — is shifted from the banks to other firms, but the other firms turn around and borrow money from the banks to help fund it.

Bloomberg’s Esteban Duarte, Donal Griffin and Carmen Arroyo [report on synthetic risk transfers](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDYtMTEvanBtb3JnYW4tcy1iaWctdHJhbnNmZXItb2YtbG9hbi1yaXNrcy1oYXZlbi10LWFsbC1sZWZ0LXRoZS1iYW5raW5nLXN5c3RlbT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B4fd6251b):

> When JPMorgan Chase & Co. arranged a series of trades to shift the risk of losses from $20 billion of its loans, some of those dangers wound up at a familiar place: rival banks.
> 
> The deal, struck late last year, was one of the biggest ever Synthetic Risk Transfer trades, or SRTs, opaque transactions heralded by Wall Street and approved by regulators that are supposed to hand possible loan losses to hedge funds and other nonbank investors. Yet some buyers in the JPMorgan deal — and in multiple other SRT trades — borrowed money from other banks to help finance their stakes and inflate returns, people familiar with the matter say.
> 
> Nomura Holdings Inc., Morgan Stanley and NatWest Group Plc, have emerged as some of the most active lenders to investors in SRTs, along with rivals including Banco Santander SA and Standard Chartered Plc. That leaves them well-placed to profit from an expected surge in the deals — but exposed to potential losses if debts end up going bad and the SRT investor hits trouble.
> 
> The lurking presence of Wall Street loans behind some of these complex trades suggests exposures that were meant to be shifted elsewhere remain tied to the banking system, an outcome that’s starting to spook regulators.
> 
> “If a bank’s lending against the SRT instrument as collateral, you’re clearly not transferring the risk outside the banking system,” says Sheila Bair, who led the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. during the financial crisis. “Any counterparty investing in SRT using bank-provided leverage should be prohibited, full stop.”

The rough idea of an SRT is that a bank buys insurance against the risk of defaults in some portfolio of its loans. Normally the way to do this is by issuing credit-linked notes: The bank sells bonds that reference the underlying portfolio of loans, and if those loans default then it doesn’t have to pay back the bonds. In exchange for this protection, the bank pays a high interest rate on the bonds. This is worth it, to the bank, because it reduces its capital requirements: Paying double-digit interest rates to move risk off its balance sheet is a good deal for the bank, because it would be even more expensive to keep the risk and meet the accompanying capital requirements. The buyers of these bonds — the people taking the credit risk off the bank’s books — are “firms such as Ares Management Corp., Blackstone and Magnetar Capital,” investment firms that raise long-term money from investors and are thus less strictly regulated than banks.

And then the buyers go and borrow money from the banks:

> To help pay for these trades, some firms will seek outside financing. Hedge funds usually do so through a class of bank lending known as repurchase agreements, or “repos,” in which the lender takes the investing fund’s SRT securities as collateral, according to people with knowledge of the practice.
> 
> Others use different types of bank borrowing such as net asset-value — or NAV — loans, a kind of financing popular with private equity firms that’s secured against a portfolio of their holdings. To back its JPMorgan deal, LuminArx used a non-repo form of borrowing, a person familiar with the matter says.
> 
> While European SRT buyers haven’t used much leverage in the recent past, the trade’s economics are different on the other side of the Atlantic where borrowed money is often needed to deliver stellar returns. “Leverage in various forms has been employed by most investors” on recent US SRT deals, says Alan Shaffran, senior portfolio manager at Magnetar.
> 
> European and Canadian SRTs are commonly made up of only the riskiest portion of a bank’s loans, which offers the best returns. But the US equivalents are broader — or “thicker” — because the buyers have to insure larger portions of the debt, meaning the securities they buy yield less. That creates an incentive to use borrowed money to juice profit.
> 
> If an investment fund just uses its own cash for a US SRT trade, it can make loss-adjusted returns in the high single digits, market participants say. When the booster shot of leverage is added, returns can jump to the mid-teens.

Well, right, you need leverage. Schematically, the capital structure is something like [[1]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E6304#footnote-1) :

1. JPMorgan makes $100 of loans and does an SRT.
2. Magnetar — the equity buyer of the SRT — puts up, say, $5 to buy the SRT, and takes the first $5 of losses on those loans: If $1 worth of loans default, Magnetar only gets $4 back from its $5 investment. 
3. Nomura — the repo lender on the SRT — puts up, say, $7 of repo leverage to help Magnetar buy the SRT, and takes the next $7 of losses on those loans: If $10 worth of loans default, Magnetar loses its entire $5 equity investment, but it also can’t pay back Nomura’s repo loan, and Nomura loses $5 of its $7. [[2]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E6304#footnote-2)
4. JPMorgan keeps the last $88 of losses: If $20 worth of loans default, Magnetar and Nomura are wiped out and JPMorgan bears $8 of losses.

Some risk _has_ been transferred out of the banking system altogether — the equity investor in the SRT really does take the first losses — but some of it has been recycled back into another bit of the banking system.

Obviously the next move is for a bank to package up a bunch of its SRT repo loans and issue SRTs against them. An SRT-squared, what could possibly etc.

No, I kid, I love it, this is just how the world works. I [wrote about the trading desks](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDMtMDQvdHJhZGluZy1kZXNrcy10cmFkZS1sZXNzLWxlbmQtbW9yZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C2bfe6a51):

> It is striking how _normal_ this is. … Broadly speaking, in the economy, there are all sorts of businesses that _do stuff_, and banks are in the meta-business of _lending them money to do the stuff_. That meta-business is supposed to be _safer_ than the underlying businesses: Instead of being in risky businesses themselves, banks have a diversified collection of senior claims on risky businesses; the other businesses run the risks, and the banks get the relatively safe first claim on their revenues. 

It turns out that this is true even of the business of taking risks off the books of banks.
