
## SocGen Delta One

The basic idea of a [delta one desk](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvRGVsdGFfb25l/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B64cb360a) is that you are selling Thing X to a customer, and buying Thing Y from the market, and Thing X and Thing Y are exactly equivalent. Thus "delta one": If you sell stock options, you hedge the options by trading stock, and the amount of stock you need to buy or sell — the "delta" of the option — changes over time as the stock price changes. But if you sell index futures contracts, you can hedge them by buying the stocks in the index (or an exchange-traded fund, etc.), and the ratio never changes: It's always one-for-one, always a delta of one. You're buying a thing at a low price and selling an equivalent thing at, ideally, a higher price.

At some level this should be a fairly low-risk business: The stuff that you are long and the stuff that you are short exactly offset each other, so you shouldn't make or lose money as the market moves. On the other hand, you are trying to make money, and the only way to make money is to take _some_ risk. If you are not taking market risk — if all your trades are fully hedged — and you're making money, then you're taking some other, slightly more esoteric risk. You're taking funding risk, or interest-rate risk. You're taking the risk of the basis between Thing X and almost-but-not-quite-identical Thing Y. You're writing one-day lookbacks into your swaps trades, and taking the legal and reputational risk that a regulator will [fine you for tricking your customers](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDQtMTEvZ29sZG1hbi1nb3Qtc29tZS1nb29kLXN3YXBzLWRlYWxzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MzAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQzMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bfcc2b722). 

Or bigger risks. One of the great delta-one failures of recent years is when Archegos Capital Management did bazillions of dollars of equity total return swaps with big banks. Those banks fully hedged their stock-price risk — they were long a bazillion dollars of the underlying stock, and short an offsetting bazillion dollars of swaps to Archegos — but they were [taking enormous _credit_ risk to Archegos](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMDctMjkvYXJjaGVnb3Mtd2FzLXRvby1idXN5LWZvci1tYXJnaW4tY2FsbHM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf85b5b52), and when Archegos blew up several of them lost money.

But of course _the_ great delta-one failure of recent years was [Jérôme Kerviel's rogue trading](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMDgtMDEtMzAvamVyb21lLWtlcnZpZWwtaW4taGlzLW93bi13b3Jkc2J1c2luZXNzd2Vlay1idXNpbmVzcy1uZXdzLXN0b2NrLW1hcmtldC1hbmQtZmluYW5jaWFsLWFkdmljZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B51c17ebd) at Société Générale in 2007 and 2008. The risk that he took was even simpler: He'd buy Thing X for himself, and _pretend_ to sell Thing Y as a perfect hedge. He was doing [completely unhedged directional trades](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvSiVDMyVBOXIlQzMlQjRtZV9LZXJ2aWVs/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B615e3ce7), and tricking the computer systems into thinking he was doing completely hedged trades. When the stuff he bought went up, this was good: It is easier to make money by buying a thing that goes up than it is to make money while being perfectly hedged. And then the stuff he bought went down and he lost $5.2 billon and went to prison.

I do not have a fully developed theory of delta one roguishness, but it does seem to have a higher-than-usual incidence of roguishness. There is something about its technicality, about the discipline of making money by buying and selling almost-but-not-quite identical things, that might give people ideas. [Especially at SocGen](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMzAvc29jZ2VuLXRyYWRlcnMtaW4tYXNpYS1leGl0ZWQtYWZ0ZXItb3B0aW9ucy1iZXRzLXdlbnQtdW5kZXRlY3RlZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bc4ef38d0):

> A pair of traders in Hong Kong have left Societe Generale SA after the French bank discovered a batch of risky bets that went undetected by the firm's risk-management systems, according to people familiar with the matter.
> 
> Kavish Kataria, a trader on the bank's Delta One desk, departed last year along with team head Ken Ng after an internal review of the transactions, said the people, asking not to be identified as the details are not public.
> 
> While SocGen didn't lose any money from the transactions, the trades could have cost the Paris-based lender hundreds of millions of dollars had an intense market downturn occurred, the people said. The lapse raised questions about risk management at one of Europe's biggest banks.
> 
> "Our strict control framework has allowed us to identify a one-off trading incident in 2023, which didn't generate any impact and led to appropriate mending measures," a SocGen spokesperson in Paris said in an emailed statement.

A famous stylized fact about rogue traders is that you only hear about the ones who lose money. From this, you might reasonably conclude that (1) lots of traders take less-than-explicitly-authorized risks with their firms' capital, (2) some of them make money and get promoted, possibly with a "good trade but stop taking unauthorized risks, you lovable scamp" warning, and (3) others lose money and get fired in disgrace. But here we have the rare case of traders getting in trouble for taking less-than-explicitly-authorized risks _without_ losing money. Investment bank risk management is sophisticated enough, and taken seriously enough, that now you can get fired for _theoretical_ losses as well as real ones. (Though if they had _made_ hundreds of millions of dollars, instead of being flattish, I wonder if they'd still be there.)

Also it's not clear how delta one [the actual trade was](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMzAvc29jZ2VuLXRyYWRlcnMtaW4tYXNpYS1leGl0ZWQtYWZ0ZXItb3B0aW9ucy1iZXRzLXdlbnQtdW5kZXRlY3RlZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Cc4ef38d0):

> Kataria had bet on volatility staying low across Indian stock-market indices, the people said, a strategy that involves dealing in options. SocGen's risk managers failed to pick up on the trades because of a glitch related to their timing, the people said.

I suppose if you're an index trader you're also allowed to buy index options. ([Or not](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZnQuY29tL2NvbnRlbnQvMTcyNTlmYzctNTczNC00NGY4LTkzZjItNWNlYjM3N2U4MjE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8d031351): "The person who made the trades in Hong Kong had not exceeded authorised trading amounts, but had placed bets on options contracts linked to Indian stock market indices that they had not been authorised to carry out.") Also I must say that Indian stock options are having a moment now: First Jane Street Group was [apparently making buckets of money](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMjIvdGhlLXNlY3JldC10cmFkZS13YXMtb3B0aW9ucy1pbi1pbmRpYT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B5f5ead4a) trading Indian options, and now SocGen had a brush with losing hundreds of millions of dollars trading them.
