
## Web of debt

The Financial Times [has a fun graphic feature](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly9pZy5mdC5jb20vcHJpdmF0ZS1lcXVpdHkv/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B37dded1c) titled “How private equity tangled banks in a web of debt,” the essential point of which is that everything in finance is more fun with a bit of leverage:

1. If there’s a company, a private equity fund can buy it, putting up some of its own money (the equity) and borrowing the rest, secured by the assets of the company.
2. The private credit fund that made the loan in Step 1 can put up some of its own money and borrow the rest from a bank to fund that loan.
3. The private equity fund buying the company in Step 1 can temporarily borrow the money it uses to write the equity check (a “subscription line”), secured by the commitments of its investors (its limited partners) to eventually put up the money.
4. After buying the company, the private equity fund can take out a margin loan, secured by its equity stake in the company.
5. Or it can take out a net asset value loan, secured by its equity stakes in a whole portfolio of companies it owns.
6. Also the company can borrow more money to pay dividends to the private equity fund.
7. The limited partners can sell their stakes in the private equity fund to a secondaries fund, which can borrow some of the money to buy them.
8. The general partners (sponsors) of the private equity fund can borrow money, “secured by management fees and carried interest income.”
9. Or other funds can borrow money to buy the general partners’ stakes in their firms. 
10. I am sure I am missing some?

I [once wrote](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMTAtMDcvbWF0dC1sZXZpbmUtcy1tb25leS1zdHVmZi1sb29raW5nLWZvci10ZXRoZXItcy1tb25leT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNzI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA3MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B865019d2) that “a (the?) main move in finance” is this: You take a thing with some risk, you divide it into a risky first-loss piece (the equity) and a safer second-loss piece (the debt), you sell the risky piece to people who want high returns and the safe piece to people who want safety. “Also you can compose this move: You can divide a bunch of things into junior and senior claims, bundle a set of junior or senior claims together, and then slice that bundle into new junior and senior claims.” This FT feature is a series of pictures illustrating that point. Take a set of cash flows anywhere in the vicinity of private equity — the earnings of a company, the returns to private equity limited partners, the commitments of those LPs, the fees paid to the general partners, the the payments on a loan — and you can slice it into safer and riskier pieces, fund the safe piece with debt and juice the returns on the riskier piece.

It would be weird if it were otherwise? Like, if you buy a house, you will probably take out a mortgage, funding most of your purchase with debt (funded by a bank/[insurer](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDctMTYvYmlsbC1hY2ttYW4tY2FuLXR3ZWV0LWhpcy1uZXctZnVuZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNzI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA3MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2723cb0e)/whoever who wants a safe return) and some of it with equity (funded by you, who want levered exposure to home-price appreciation). And then you’ll go about your day without thinking “hmm how could I slice this up further,” because you are not fundamentally in the business of slicing up cash flows. But private equity firms are, so every cash flow they come into contact with gets sliced up.

The point of all of this is that at the bottom you have some set of businesses with some set of cash flows, and then those cash flows are sliced and recombined in various ways so that lots of different people (private equity GPs, their LPs, the GPs and LPs of secondaries and GP-stake and private-credit funds, bank lenders, etc.) get exactly the package of cash flows they want. And that is the business they are all in.

“As higher interest rates put pressure on borrowers,” says the FT, “regulators are asking an important question: could the private equity industry pose a risk to the wider financial system?” Sure? I guess? I am not particularly worried — the _banks’_ claims on all of this stuff seem pretty senior, and the substrate at the bottom of all of this leverage (cash flows from lots of businesses) seems reasonably robust and diversified. But a (the?) main risk to the financial system is when people put money into assets that they think are safe, and those safe assets turn out to be correlated and risky. The more sorts of safe tranches you manufacture out of the basic raw materials of business cash flows, the more ways some of them could go wrong.