
## Hedging

If you work at a big public technology company, you might get a large chunk of your pay in the form of stock in your company. Over time, you will accumulate a lot of stock; a lot of your net worth might consist of shares in your company. This is good, this is what the company wants, this aligns incentives: If you own a lot of stock, you will work hard so the company does well so your stock will go up.

On the other hand, _you_ may not like it. You have a lot of undiversified risk: A lot of your financial net worth is tied up in one company, and a lot of your human capital is tied up in that same company, and if the company goes under you will lose everything. And while it is nice to align incentives, if you are one of thousands of well-paid employees at a large public tech company, there might not be all that much _you personally_ can do to shape the company's destiny.

So you might want to diversify. The easy way to do this is to sell your stock and buy an index fund. Your stock probably has vesting periods and restrictions, so you can't sell all it as soon as you get it, but if you've been there a long time you will have lots of unrestricted shares and can sell down.

But tech stocks mostly go up, so if you've been there a long time and are selling shares you got years ago, you will have large capital gains. That's nice for you, really, but it does mean you have to pay taxes when you sell your stock and buy index funds. 

On the other hand, what you could do is:

- Start a _partnership_ with some other people who happen to own stocks in _other_ tech companies. There are lots of those people: If you're a well-paid Meta engineer with a bunch of stock, you can probably find well-paid Amazon and Alphabet engineers who also own a bunch of their companies' stocks.
- _Contribute_ your shares to the partnership, in exchange for a stake in the partnership. You put in $1 million of Meta stock for 1/3 of the partnership; your friends put in $1 million of Amazon and Alphabet stock in exchange for 1/3 stakes in the partnership.
- Now, instead of owning $1 million of Meta stock, you own a one-third share in a somewhat more diversified $3 million pot of stocks. (And you can expand this to more stocks for more diversification.)

The advantage is that, while selling your stock for cash and then reinvesting the cash in an index fund is a taxable transaction, contributing your stock to a partnership in exchange for a share of that partnership is not. And if you do it right, you can make the partnership's holdings look a lot like an index fund. (Not tax advice! It is not in fact quite as simple as this, though this is the right general idea. [[1]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E4915#footnote-1) )

It is not trivial to do this right, _for you:_ You have to get the technical tax structuring right, plus what are the odds that you know a bunch of other engineers at other companies with exactly the right amounts of stock to contribute? But with enough well-paid engineers at big public tech companies, it is sensible for someone else to do this at scale and offer it as a product. Bloomberg's [Eliyahu Kamisher reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMTEvdGVjaC1taWxsaW9uYWlyZXMtY2hhc2UtYmlsbGlvbmFpcmUtdGF4LXNoaWVsZHMtd2l0aC1zd2FwLWZ1bmQ_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQxMTI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDExJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb9d4e51b):

> Known as an exchange fund or a swap fund, the product is familiar to the super rich. Now, share-price rallies at companies such as Meta Platforms Inc. and Nvidia Corp. are creating an opportunity to offer the structure to moderately wealthy techies as well, says Srikanth Narayan, founder of San Francisco-based Cache.
> 
> "The mission is to make these financial products - that have typically been in the upper echelon - available more broadly," said Narayan, a former engineer at Uber Technologies Inc. "All of my friends and colleagues are talking about the same thing, which is that more of their net worth is tied up in a single stock." …
> 
> Cache's swap-fund offering enables participants to pool their stock holdings together, creating a more diversified collection of assets. Investors then get shares of the fund equivalent to their contributions, giving them the benefits of more varied holdings without having to sell their stock.
> 
> There's a limit to how much stock of a particular company Cache can accept because the swap fund is designed to mirror the tech-heavy Nasdaq, Narayan said. Currently, he can bring in more Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp. shares, and he's seeking stock from non-tech Nasdaq companies such as PepsiCo Inc. and Costco Wholesale Corp.

Here are [more details](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VjYWNoZS5jb20vcHJvZHVjdC9leGNoYW5nZS1mdW5kcw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bbfce0c6b) from Cache. Kamisher notes that, if this really takes off (so far it's pretty small), it could be bad for tax revenue; California gets a lot of money from tech equity compensation. But that effect depends on what this product _replaces_. If it replaces "sell your stock and buy index funds," it will lower tax revenue. If it replaces "just hold onto your stock until you retire," it won't.

Me, though, I'm more interested in what it could do for incentives. Presumably the big tech companies pay their employees with lots of stock (in part for accounting reasons sure but also) in order to align incentives and motivate the employees. [[2]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E4915#footnote-2)  You would expect that a lot of Meta employees own a lot of Meta stock, a lot of Alphabet employees own a lot of Alphabet stock, a lot of Amazon employees own a lot of Amazon stock and so forth. Each company has employees with strong financial incentives — not just the desire for raises and bonuses, but also the desire to increase the value of their existing stock — to help their company win in the general competition among tech giants.

But what if all of the midlevel employees of all of these companies ended up owning diversified portfolios of all of them? What if workers in Big Tech were compensated with, effectively, a portfolio of Big Tech Index shares? (Plus Costco, if Cache can find any. [[3]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E4915#footnote-3) ) What does that do for competition?

"Should index funds be illegal," I [sometimes](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMDIvYS1oZWRnZS1mdW5kLXRoYXQtcy1hbHNvLWEtbmV3c3BhcGVyP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MTEyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQxMSZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B04329024) [ask](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTUtMDQtMTYvc2hvdWxkLW11dHVhbC1mdW5kcy1iZS1pbGxlZ2FsLT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDExMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MTEmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2396d19d) [around](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMTgtMTItMDcvbW9uZXktc3R1ZmYtcmVndWxhdG9ycy1hc2staWYtaW5kZXgtZnVuZHMtYXJlLWJhZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDExMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MTEmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B83e29b6c) [here](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMTgtMTItMDcvbW9uZXktc3R1ZmYtcmVndWxhdG9ycy1hc2staWYtaW5kZXgtZnVuZHMtYXJlLWJhZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDExMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MTEmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C83e29b6c): If every public company is owned by diversified investors who also own all of its competitors, will those companies have less incentive to compete? One of the [main responses](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35003841.260818/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMjIvZG9lcy1tYXJrLXp1Y2tlcmJlcmctb3duLXRvby1tdWNoLW1ldGE_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQxMTI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDExJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B858b2171) to this concern is that, while the _institutional shareholders_ are mostly diversified, the _executives and employees_ tend to own concentrated positions in their employers' stocks, so _they_ are motivated to compete. And they run the company from day to day. But what if the employees were all diversified too?

NOTE: AN IMPORTANT IDEA: INDEX FUNDS ARE THE ENDGAME OF DIVERSIFICATION, AND EVERYONE OWNS NEARLY EVERYTHING WHEN THAT HAPPENS

--- 

A few months ago, [I mentioned](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36159276.205878/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDItMjAvYmlsbC1hY2ttYW4tcy1zdG9ja3Mtd2VudC11cD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNzIzMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA3MjMmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B59dc17e6) “Bill Ackman’s old-school approach to managing a hedge fund — he’s a famous guy, he makes concentrated high-conviction bets on stocks, he doesn’t hedge much,” and a reader wrote in to chastise me. The _old-school_ approach to managing a hedge fund is [Alfred Winslow Jones’s](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36159276.205878/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQWxmcmVkX1dpbnNsb3dfSm9uZXM/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8e1aeb38): Jones invented the hedge fund, and his early approach was arguably more like that of modern multistrategy funds that hire lots of smart investors to pick stocks and hedge out market exposure. (Thus the name.) Jones also invented the hedge fund compensation scheme, though (particularly the 20% performance fee), and _that_ proliferated among funds that didn’t do as much hedging. But a famous guy making big stock bets and charging 20% of returns was, in the long history of hedge funds, something of a novelty.

Still, I stand by what I wrote: There _was_ a fairly long vogue for high-profile individual hedge fund managers who made big bets, and that era is passing, and now hedge funds are big institutions stocked with well-paid but somewhat anonymous portfolio managers grinding out alpha with low volatility. At Business Insider, Linette Lopez [meditates on the transition](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36159276.205878/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYnVzaW5lc3NpbnNpZGVyLmNvbS9kZWF0aC1oZWRnZS1mdW5kLXN1cGVyc3RhcnMtd2FsbC1zdHJlZXQtc3RvY2stbWFya2V0LXRpdGFucy1nb25lLTIwMjQtNw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2f1708af):

> What is clear is that hedge funds run by an individual star, by one prodigious mind, are not raising the massive money they used to. Clients who once were proud to hand their money to a specific person are pushing back; they want to pay lower fees and see less-volatile returns. The funds that have survived rely on a stable of faceless traders testing out different ideas, brokering transactions, and harvesting the returns for the collective. Quant strategies — which are built on algorithmic trading — have also become more popular with the ultrawealthy. More robots, fewer people, lower overhead. …
> 
> In decades past, clients were mostly HNWIs: high-net-worth individuals. Nowadays the biggest money runners are institutions, and institutions are more exacting. One legendary but shy fund manager told me that these institutions are more interested in steady returns, and the wild swings in performance that hedge funds offer simply give them heartburn. "They can sleep better at night," the person said. "The economy can turn bad, the stock market can crash, and they're not going to share losses."
> 
> Sebastian Mallaby, the author of "More Money Than God: Hedge Funds and the Making of the New Elite," told me that institutions are also less willing to be enchanted by the personal magnetism of a founder like Julian Robertson, the founder of the legendary fund Tiger Management.
> 
> "In the old days, Julian Robertson would hold a party for HNWIs and have some kind of wacky show for them at the Met, and they'd say 'Julian, what a guy' and leave him alone for a year," Mallaby said. "That's gone away because individual investors aren't as important as institutional investors, who have to show they've been careful where they put the money.”

The story here is something like “institutions demand that they actually get identifiable alpha and uncorrelated, high and stable returns in exchange for all the fees they are paying hedge funds, and the hedge fund industry is responding by building stable professional institutions that actually provide that service.” That’s a good story! But the parties might be less fun.