
## Should index funds be illegal?

We [talked last month](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMDIvaG93LWNvdWxkLXRoZS1kZWF0aC1iZXRzLW1ha2UtbW9uZXk_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Be67a2d10) about a Federal Trade Commission ruling involving Scott Sheffield, the former chief executive officer of Pioneer Natural Resources. Exxon Mobil Corp. had a deal to buy Pioneer, and the FTC demanded, as a condition of approving the deal, that Sheffield not be allowed to serve on Exxon’s board. The FTC claimed that Sheffield conspired with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to keep oil prices high: Sheffield had some meetings and communications with OPEC officials, and he also went around making public statements that US oil companies like Pioneer should be more disciplined about capital expenditures and drilling. Instead of rushing to drill more wells every time oil prices went up, they should moderate production so they could actually profit from those high prices.

This view, I should say, was (and is) not at all uncommon, and you do not need a conspiracy to explain it. The US oil industry had quite well-known cycles of overspending during booms and then collapsing in busts; investing in oil drillers was a good way to lose money. The companies knew this, the shareholders knew this, and it just made sense for them all to rethink things. Instead of losing money on oil drilling, wouldn’t it be nicer to _make_ money? The way you do this is by not investing too much in new capacity all the time. Everyone could have come to that conclusion on their own, without conspiring with OPEC, or with each other.

Last month Sheffield [filed a comment with the FTC](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly9maWxlcy5sYnIuY2xvdWQvcHVibGljLzIwMjQtMDUvc2hlZmZpZWxkJTIwMS5wZGY_VmVyc2lvbklkPUVSa1VyNHNxQmluUzFLblFmd1V1MnZOSUJzQjZhcUFEJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9c3Vic3RhY2smdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B3d487de9), objecting to how he was treated in the Exxon settlement. His basic complaints, which strike me as pretty fair, are (1) the FTC’s claims about his ties to OPEC are false or exaggerated and (2) he didn’t have any opportunity to respond to them, because the FTC’s criticism of him came in a settlement with Exxon without his involvement. But he also defends his decisions to moderate production by saying they were informed, not by conversations with OPEC, but by conversations with BlackRock:

> Pioneer’s new capital framework was informed by discussions with shareholders and Pioneer’s Investor Relations Department, which tracked shareholder and analyst feedback and other public reports. Within the first month of returning as CEO, Mr. Sheffield traveled the country speaking with nearly three dozen of Pioneer’s largest shareholders (comprising more than one-third of the outstanding shares at the time), including major investment managers like Fidelity, TIAA/Nuveen, Capital World Investors, and Blackrock. These firms were managing trillions of dollars for pension and retirement funds and others.
> 
> Nearly all of the shareholders with whom Mr. Sheffield spoke expressed support for moderating growth to improve Pioneer’s free cash flow, strengthen its balance sheet, and lower costs and execution risk. Pioneer and Mr. Sheffield frequently received questions from shareholders on these topics during road shows and conferences. The decision to return more free cash flow to shareholders was undertaken to provide shareholders the level of returns that they expected regardless of oil prices, not to impact oil prices or output. These issues became even more critical when COVID hit.
> 
> There are numerous industry reports documenting the shift in how analysts and shareholders were thinking about the oil industry around the time of Mr. Sheffield’s return as CEO. One report published by Wolfe Research in 2017 explains that “[s]hareholders are demanding cash return.” The analyst firm says, “We implore companies to exert capital discipline and temper growth targets in the pursuit of cash returns. We will resolutely oppose aggressive growth targets and strategies, in general.” The report explains that “oil stocks dramatically underperformed the market” because of concerns about the “End of the Oil Age.” These demands were not hidden from the public or government authorities. Major news organizations covered them. Mr. Sheffield regularly discussed his views on Pioneer’s capital framework given shareholder interest in it.

Again! If you had asked Fidelity, TIAA, Capital and BlackRock “thinking only from your perspective as shareholders _of Pioneer_, ignoring everything else, should Pioneer drill more oil or return cash,” I bet they would all have said “return cash.” The boom-and-bust cycle was well understood at that point, and bad for shareholders; returning cash was the rational thing to do.

And yet those shareholders were _not_ shareholders only of Pioneer: They are giant institutions who own shares in many oil companies. It’s _possible_ that a Pioneer-only shareholder would have said “no, let all the other companies cut production; Pioneer should invest more in drilling to grab market share while everyone else is cutting back.” That is a possibly rational thing to think if you are a shareholder of _one_ oil company, but an insane thing to think if you are a shareholder of _every_ oil company: If everyone increases production, no one gains market share and the price of oil goes down. If all of these shareholders were meeting with Sheffield on the same day they were meeting with other oil CEOs, of course they expressed support for moderating growth.

You [know](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMTgtMTItMDcvbW9uZXktc3R1ZmYtcmVndWxhdG9ycy1hc2staWYtaW5kZXgtZnVuZHMtYXJlLWJhZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Becc1df72) the [theory](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTUtMDQtMTYvc2hvdWxkLW11dHVhbC1mdW5kcy1iZS1pbGxlZ2FsLT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb89eab82): Common ownership of all the companies in an industry, by a handful of big diversified institutional investors, leads to reduced competition over price. This theory is hotly controversial, in part because no one believes that diversified investors go to meetings with CEOs and say “you should cut production to keep prices high.” But here is a CEO almost saying that, as a _defense_ to charges that OPEC told him “you should cut production to keep prices high.” It wasn’t OPEC, it was the mutual funds.
