
## Peak pod

The most basic [move](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-10-07/matt-levine-s-money-stuff-looking-for-tether-s-money) in [finance](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-28/ftx-s-blockfi-rescue-didn-t-work) is the [slicing](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-01-18/slicing-cash-flows-for-better-ratings) of cash flows. You have a thing with some uncertain payoff: It will surely be worth at least $X, but it could be worth as much as $Y. You put the thing in a box and sell claims on the box to different people who want different things. You sell $X worth of senior claims to people who want safety, promising to pay them back first: The box will surely be worth at least $X, so their claims are very safe. And then you sell some junior claims to other people who want risk: The box could be worth as much as $Y, in which case you'd pay off the $X of senior claims and have money left over for the junior claims. Those claims are risky (they could go to zero), but also more lucrative (they could be worth a lot); they promise a higher expected return in exchange for taking more risk. And of course you could slice more finely: Issue one set of super-safe senior claims, another set of pretty safe mezzanine claims, a set of risky junior claims, etc. And an important way to come up with new financial businesses is to notice some financial thing with some fluctuating value and decompose it into a safe part and a risky part. 

One way to think about multi-manager, multi-strategy [hedge funds](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-11-08/the-coffee-futures-got-stale) (or "pod shops") is that they are a way to turn _investing skill_ into this sort of tractable, tranche-able financial asset. The rough theory is:

1. Some people can, with hard work and native skill, identify which stocks (bonds, commodities, etc.) are better and which are worse, within some narrow sector, with some reasonably high success rate. Not through any sort of magic market intuition but through deep study and specialization: If you spend your life studying the biotech industry, you might have somewhat better-than-chance odds of picking which biotech stocks will outperform and which will underperform.
2. If they just went out and bought the five stocks they thought were the best, they'd have a good chance of making a lot of money, but there'd be risks too. Perhaps there would be a general stock market crash, or a collapse in the biotech industry; they might have accurately picked the best stocks but those stocks would still go down.
3. But you can hire them and isolate their skill: Make them buy the best stocks in their sector, short the worst stocks in their sector, and keep a neutral exposure to the stock market, the sector and other factors, so that they only make (or lose) money if their favorite stocks outperform (or underperform) their least-favorite stocks due to their pure stock-picking skill. 
4. And you can also hire other specialists in other sectors, and other asset classes, and make all of them hedge, so that you have a diversified portfolio that has no exposure to the broad stock market, to individual sectors, to factors, etc., but is exposed only to their collective investing skill.
5. And you fire the ones who mess up, so the overall skill level remains high.
6. And then you decompose what they are doing into (1) a very large, very boring, very safe portfolio and (2) a smaller and more volatile stream of payoffs for their investing skill.

If you do this right, you can have them build a very large portfolio with not very much risk. They can bet on a lot of things, and bet against a lot of other things, and those things are highly correlated with each other. Like, they make $1 billion of bets that blue widgets will go up, and they make $1 billion of bets that green widgets will go down, and historically blue and green widget prices have moved in lockstep. That's a total of $2 billion of bets, but they cancel each other out. If blue widgets go down 20% (and they lose $200 million on their long bet), then probably green widgets will also go down 20% (and they make $200 million on their short bet), so there's still $2 billion. But the idea is that they know something the market doesn't, and actually blue widgets will go up by 5 percentage points more (or down by 5 percentage points less) than green widgets, and so they'll make $50 million on this bet. Of course they could be wrong; maybe blue widgets will _underperform_ green ones and the bet will lose money. Not the whole $2 billion amount of the bet - blue and green widgets are pretty fungible - but, you know, maybe $50 million.

And you can kind of abstractly do some math like "this bet requires $2 billion, and we hope it will pay back like $2.05 billion, but even if we're wrong it should pay back $2 billion, or $1.95 billion at absolute worst." And then you can go out and sell, say, $1.9 billion of senior claims on this bet, saying "we'll pay you back the $1.9 billion no matter what." And then you raise, say, $100 million of junior claims on this bet, saying "we hope to pay you back $150 million on your $100 million investment, but if we're wrong you eat the losses."

Traditionally the people buying the senior claims are prime brokerage desks at big investment banks, and they can check all of this: They can look at the actual trades that you're doing and say "ah yes, historically, blue and green widget prices have been highly correlated, so the chances of losing much of this $2 billion is slim, and the chances of eating into our $1.9 billion are close to zero." And they can check  your track record, too, and say "yeah these guys usually make money and always pay back their senior claims so it's fine." Also they hold your collateral - the blue widgets you're long, the green widgets you're short - and if the trade does start to collapse they can probably shut it down before you lose too much money (and, thus, before _they_ lose any money). 

And then traditionally the people buying the junior claims are your hedge fund investors, who are betting that you really do have all this investing skill, that you really can turn their $100 million into $150 million much more often than you turn it into $50 million. And then traditionally you yourself, and your employees, have some sort of super-junior claim, where you get paid a big chunk of the upside if the bets pay off.

Now, another important move in finance is to worry about this slicing of cash flows. The traditional worries are:

1. The safe senior claims: Are they really that safe? Do we really _know_ that this trade can't lose a lot of money and cut into the $1.9 billion senior claim? What if blue widgets fall 10% and green widgets go up 10%? Then this strategy loses $200 million, the junior claims are wiped out and the lenders lose money.
2. The risky junior claims: Boy, they sure look risky! In the example above, the total portfolio lost 10% of its value, but the junior claims lost 100% of their value. Seems risky.
3. The interplay between them: If you have a $2 billion portfolio and it loses 10% of its value for some temporary reason, you might just hold onto it until the prices recover. But if you have a $2 billion portfolio with 95% leverage and it loses 10% of its value, your lender - a bank prime brokerage - will seize the collateral and sell it as quickly as possible, which means (1) you permanently lose all of your equity and also (2) your lender's sale might further drive down prices and cause more problems.

Here's a [Bloomberg News story about "peak pod"](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-30/ken-griffin-s-citadel-hedge-fund-rivals-draw-scrutiny-over-crowding-leverage):

> Multimanager funds like [Ken] Griffin's Citadel have come to dominate the hedge fund industry, riding a steady run of outperformance to oversee more than $1 trillion, including a healthy dose of leverage. But the explosive growth has led the industry giants to pile into many of the same trades.
>
> That has built unease among regulators, investors and traders over these so-called pod shops. …
>
> Overcrowding in some bets, increased market volatility, an expensive talent war and lower returns this year have prompted market participants to question whether the world of high finance is approaching peak pod. ...
>
> "There's some overcrowding and concern about the amount of leverage at individual firms and collectively," John Jackson, head of hedge fund research at investment consultant Mercer, said during a recent Capital Allocators podcast. And because they typically cut risk very quickly "we are worried about the potential snowball effect." …
>
> Clients are now fixated on leverage and the risk of "platform de-grossing" - or stampede selling - Goldman Sachs said in an earlier report. …
>
> Much of the increased regulatory focus has been in Treasury markets, where leverage tends to be the highest. Hedge funds in aggregate had estimated leverage of 56-to-1 on $553 billion of Treasury repo borrowing as of December 2022, according to a September research note by Federal Reserve staffers Ayelen Banegas and Phillip Monin.
>
> That's why many of the big firms incurred larger-than-expected losses during the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic. They were caught in the so-called basis trade, which is designed to profit from small differences between Treasury futures and the cash market. Considered a safe arbitrage bet if held to maturity, it can occasionally go haywire, as it did in March 2020. 

If you are [long $1 billion of Treasury bonds and short $1 billion of Treasury futures](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-09-14/people-are-worried-about-the-basis-trade), your chances of losing even 2% of your money are low enough - because Treasury bonds and Treasury futures are almost the same thing - that a bank will lend you 98% of the money you need to do that trade. But they are not zero! Sometimes bad stuff happens.

But the other problem is the crowded trades. "Of the $90.7 billion that Citadel held in US stocks at the end of September, 93% was in shares Millennium also holds," says the article. The essential bet of the multi-manager pod shops is that investing skill is (1) real, repeatable and identifiable and (2) not correlated to broad markets: Picking the better things and shorting the worse things should work whether the stock market is up and down. But the risk is that investing skill might be _correlated with everyone else's investing skill._ If you hire people who are really good at knowing which stocks are good and which are bad, and then your four biggest competitors hire similarly skilled people, they might all pick the same good stocks and short the same bad stocks. And then if their bets blow up, they all blow up at once.

## First-loss funds

Here's another way to [slice the returns from hedge-fund skill](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-30/hedge-fund-to-back-traders-who-risk-their-own-money-if-bets-fail):

> Andrew Lubin, previously the chief executive officer of the London unit of SAC Capital Advisors, and Tim Pearey, former CEO of Odey Asset Management, said they have started a hedge fund that provides capital to traders if they put in their own cash and agree to lose their money first when bets fail.
>
> Such arrangements, known as first-loss funds, are a niche part of the $4 trillion hedge fund industry and offer traders an opportunity to hold on to more of their profits in exchange for taking on the bulk of the risk. Traders signing up for Lubin and Pearey's London-based AB Asset Scale could keep as much as 60% of the profits they generate, higher than traditional industry payouts of 20% at major multi-strategy hedge funds. ...
>
> Such platforms frequently hire and fire traders whose performance has dropped or when a trading strategy they run falls out of favour. Lubin and Pearey said they are looking to pick talented traders affected by this churn.
>
> The first-loss funds provide as much as nine times the capital of a hedge fund or a trader, with their money being housed in a separately managed account. The arrangement, which provides a significant boost to assets under management, requires any losses to accrue to the trader's own invested capital first. …
>
> Losses of up to 10% will be absorbed by the trader's own capital with the fund aiming to liquidate their bets when declines hit 8.5%, according to an investor document seen by Bloomberg.

I like it. The traditional way to get fired from a multi-manager fund is to have too big a drawdown, to lose, say, 5% or 10% of your allocated capital. If you work at a big multi-strategy fund and then are "affected by this churn," the natural inferences to draw are:

1. You have investing skill (that's why the pod shop hired you), but
2. You sometimes lose 10% of your capital (that's why they fired you).

So someone else should be willing to hire you to run their money, but only if you take the risk of losing 10% of your capital.

## Factors

If you invest in stocks, your returns will come from roughly three sources:

1. The broad stock market goes up or down.
2. You can get paid (or lose money) for taking on some particular systematic risk: Small companies' stocks tend to outperform large stocks, and cheap stocks (by price-to-book value) tend to outperform expensive ones. 
3. You can be idiosyncratically good at picking stocks.

The first thing is generally pretty easy to measure; there are widely used broad market indexes. The second thing is less obvious; someone needs to identify the systematic factors and measure the data. The third thing - alpha, investing skill - is generally what's left over after the first two things.

This means that identifying and measuring factors - Thing 2 - is very important. For one thing, those factors are part of a popular investment approach: There are funds that try to capture factor premia by, say, buying cheap stocks and avoiding expensive ones, and you want to know how well that strategy works. For another thing, lots of people _really_ want to know how much investment skill their managers have - how much alpha they create - and since that is the residue after subtracting factor returns, you need to know what those are.

For many academic and other uses, the main factor model is the [Fama-French three-factor model](https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/valuation/fama-french-three-factor-model/), where the three factors are market returns, size ("small minus big") and value ("high minus low," that is, high book-to-price ratio minus low book-to-price ratio). And the main source of historical data on the factors is [Kenneth French's website](https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html). And here is a fun [Bloomberg Markets story](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2024-03-11/a-fight-over-factor-investing-tests-a-pillar-of-modern-finance) by Mary Childs and Justina Lee about how sometimes that historical data … changes?

> In 2021, three professors then based at the University of Toronto noticed something strange and potentially unsettling. The numbers were "noisy" - that is, they changed in significant ways depending on when they were downloaded from the site. Pat Akey, Adriana Robertson and Mikhail Simutin wrote up their puzzling findings in two working papers. ... The authors noted that changes in the numbers seemed to improve the historical record of the value investment strategy-that is, of buying cheap stocks-and wrote that a "lack of transparency" made it impossible to know what to make of that.
> 
> Fama and French's November article confirms that the numbers were changing and lays out the reasons. Among them: Corrections in historical stock market records and adjustments related to accounting rule changes that affected how some stocks are categorized. French's Dartmouth website now contains an archive of earlier versions of the data, so researchers can compare them.

"Everything is seating charts," I [sometimes](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-01-11/direct-listings-are-a-thing-now) [say](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-06-14/morgan-stanley-s-ted-pick-matched-wits-with-goldman-s-blankfein) [around](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2024-02-22/put-the-money-in-the-boxx), about how informal networks of friendship and influence are often the most important incentives in business. In academia, I suppose the equivalent is that everything is the acknowledgments section of working papers? After Akey, Robertson and Simutin questioned the Fama-French data, Fama and French circulated another paper explaining their methodology and the changes, and they were mad:

> Two days before the paper hit SSRN, a PDF of it landed in the email inboxes of some of the country's top economists and legal scholars. The accompanying message from Fama made it clear why he and French had written the article-and also that he was annoyed. "Most of you are in the acknowledgements of two papers," he wrote. "There is lots of strong language in those papers about the effects of updates in the Fama-French factors. ... Our view is that their results are not surprising for those with experience in asset pricing research." Fama added: "For us, the whole experience is a great example of the old saw: No good deed goes unpunished."

"Most of you are in the acknowledgements" of critical papers is I suppose how academics say "traitors!"

## Yellow

You could have a model like this:

1. Every company has a capital structure with an order of seniority. Secured debt generally gets paid first, followed by unsecured debt, followed by preferred stock, followed by common stock, etc.
2. Every so often, some weird event flips some part of the seniority, so that people who would normally get paid back first get pushed to the back of the line, and people who would normally be at the back of the line move up.
3. You should try to (1) anticipate (or cause!) those events, (2) buy the stuff that will move up and (3) avoid the stuff that will move down.

Probably the most notable recent case is [Credit Suisse Group AG's additional tier 1 capital securities](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDMtMjAvdWJzLWdvdC1jcmVkaXQtc3Vpc3NlLWZvci1hbG1vc3Qtbm90aGluZz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd6800fc1). These AT1s were a form of subordinated debt that ranked senior to common stock in the capital structure, as Credit Suisse's disclosures and presentations frequently said. But they had provisions saying that in certain circumstances - regulatory capital falling below a trigger, or certain national bailouts - they would be _disappear_, and it was not _necessarily_ true that the common stock would disappear in those circumstances. And in fact, when Credit Suisse was acquired by UBS Group AG last year in a regulator-driven shotgun marriage, (1) the common stock got something and (2) the AT1s got nothing. If you had owned the senior AT1s a day before the merger, you would have been smart to sell them and swap into the junior common stock, because that got paid and the AT1s didn't.

This turned out to be very controversial, a lot of people still disagree that the AT1s should have been zeroed, and there are lawsuits. This is a pretty normal feature of this model: Seniority is rarely flipped in some clean, obvious and noncontroversial way; somebody will always sue.

(Some other recent examples share that feature: Generically, there's a company, it has debt, and some new or junior creditors [strike a deal with the company](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDUtMTAvY3JlZGl0LW1hcmtldC1jbGFzaGVzLWFyZS1nZXR0aW5nLXVnbGllci1kaXJ0aWVyLW1vcmUtY29tbW9uP2NtcGlkPUJCRDAzMjAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDMyMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B698b43e9) to give it new money in exchange for being made more senior than the previously senior creditors. The creditors left out of the deal [sue](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDQtMDcvZGlzdHJlc3NlZC1kZWJ0LWRlYWwtbWFrZXMtcGVvcGxlLW1hZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb2323af7), claiming that this is not allowed.)

Last year, Yellow Corp., the trucking company, filed for bankruptcy. A week before the bankruptcy, an investment firm called MFN Partners paid something like $23 million to buy a ton of Yellow stock, which [seemed like a weird choice](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMDcvaXJsLXMtdXNlcnMtd2VyZS1ub3QtaXJsP2NtcGlkPUJCRDAzMjAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDMyMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B591d4e59): Yellow's bankruptcy was _extremely_ well telegraphed, and generally when a company goes bankrupt its stock becomes worthless. But [in fact](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMTAveW91LWNhbi1zZWxsLXRoZS1iaXRjb2lucy15b3UtZG9uLXQtbWluZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bac479e80) Yellow's assets (largely a real estate portfolio) turned out to be more valuable than its debt, there is money left over, and shareholders could get hundreds of millions of dollars back, making this a good trade for MFN. 

Or not. Bloomberg's [Steven Church reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMjQtMDMtMTkvbWZuLXBhcnRuZXJzLWZpZ2h0cy13aXRoLXllbGxvdy10cnVja2luZy1wZW5zaW9ucy1hbmQtcGJnYz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B6038212c):

> MFN Partners is the single biggest stockholder of Yellow, which filed bankruptcy last year after failing to win concessions from its union drivers. The company has been liquidating its valuable portfolio of real estate under court oversight and that process has brought in more than initially expected.
> 
> The way things are going, MFN and other shareholders including the US government could share a surplus in the range of hundreds of millions of dollars. But they'll first need to step over pension funds, which have argued they should get the cash because Yellow ditched its retirement obligations in bankruptcy. …
> 
> The pension funds claim that because the trucker shut down and fired tens of thousands of unionized workers, Yellow must kick in at least $582 million to cover future retirement payments, according to court papers. They claim the fight should be handled in private arbitration; the hedge fund says it should play out quickly and in open court, which would get everyone paid faster.

One way to think about this is my model above: Ordinarily, when it is a going concern operating its business normally, a company has to pay its pension obligations. Those pension obligations are senior to the common stock; the shareholders only get the profits after the pension obligations are paid. But in bankruptcy, perhaps, that flips: Perhaps Yellow can walk away from its pension obligations for $0, leaving enough money to pay shareholders. On that model, buying the stock a week before the bankruptcy was a good trade: The stock was junior to the debt and pensions and so worth roughly nothing, but _in bankruptcy_ it could ditch the pensions and become worth more.

This is not the only model, though, and the pension funds and the US Pension Benefit Guarantee Corp. hotly dispute it. The dispute is actually kind of weird. Yellow's unionized drivers are members of various large, union, multiemployer pensions; those pensions are underfunded; and Yellow had contractual obligations to contribute to those pensions. If it stopped doing so and withdrew from the pensions, it would have to put in additional money to cover the underfunded pension liabilities, and those withdrawal liabilities could be as much as $6.5 billion, [Yellow itself estimated](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2VjLmdvdi9BcmNoaXZlcy9lZGdhci9kYXRhLzcxNjAwNi8wMDAwOTUwMTcwMjMwNDIwNzEveWVsbC0yMDIzMDYzMC5odG0jbm90ZXNfdG9fY29uc29saWRhdGVkX2ZpbmFuY2lhbF9zdGF0ZW1lbg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B4a029eed). It went bankrupt in large part because of a dispute with its unions over these pensions, so it stopped contributing in bankruptcy and the pensions filed claims for the withdrawal liability.

But in 2021, the US government [bailed out the pension funds](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud2hpdGVob3VzZS5nb3YvYnJpZWZpbmctcm9vbS9zdGF0ZW1lbnRzLXJlbGVhc2VzLzIwMjIvMTIvMDgvZmFjdC1zaGVldC1wcmVzaWRlbnQtYmlkZW4tYW5ub3VuY2VzLWhpc3RvcmljLXJlbGllZi10by1wcm90ZWN0LWhhcmQtZWFybmVkLXBlbnNpb25zLW9mLWh1bmRyZWRzLW9mLXRob3VzYW5kcy1vZi11bmlvbi13b3JrZXJzLWFuZC1yZXRpcmVlcy8/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bfee842aa) as part of the American Rescue Plan. Now they have plenty of money, so [Yellow argues](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDQ3NTY3JnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MTMyMiZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B91466635) that they are not underfunded, so it should have no withdrawal liability: "[The pensions] cannot ignore the [ARP bailout] or feign a need to allocate to the Debtors an attributable share of [unfunded vested benefits] that do not exist, at the expense of the Debtors'  
unsecured creditors and equity holders." The [pensions](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDUzNTAwJnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MTY2NSZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C7723b1c7), and the [PBGC](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDY3Nzg0JnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MjY0MCZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Dcecb3c7a) - the government agency that insures pensions - argue, in effect, "oh come on it could not possibly work that way, you can't get out of your pension obligations because of a government bailout of those pensions." But it's worth a shot!
