
## Nvidia

[Meanwhile](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/u/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl1XNhuq11IZCFYAyAH9rdyNhwpvDfj6U5tQaO-3bGQ5l5upTug7jVenIPky1niJYdZyfq1M3ipz8m3c6f2xN8gNQE26ySlrkh1jVr996qEEQ_POKDO6E3FkuIe-fckTZGOjTTZjla-N9XeHKSxoRePxvSun3Guksv13hGsO1Qm_RfnrskoMjC5G4GFzAyQjZVMvpcvY0JN2CSxcYI4WkIlfaGyq7ih8zVepxCWamDyGJQT08M4Z6V3VjTpnDUOgnNw%3D%3D):

> Nvidia’s earnings have become as important for US markets as key economic data, according to analysts, as the chipmaker prepares to announce quarterly results that will allow investors to gauge the health of the artificial intelligence boom. ...
> 
> Nvidia’s share price has surged 160 per cent this year, propelled by a boom in spending on AI, which its chips power, and now has a $3.1tn market value, surpassed only by Apple. It accounts for about 6 per cent of the S&P 500 and more than a quarter of the benchmark’s 18 per cent gains this year.
> 
> Nvidia has become “one of the most important events on the macro calendar”, with recent results leading to market reactions “that rival the sort of moves taking place after a surprise US jobs report or consumer prices index release”, said analysts at Deutsche Bank.
> 
> The bank noted that the S&P rose 2.1 per cent the day after Nvidia’s results in February, its second-best daily performance of the year.

Well! Obviously you know the question we ask around here: If you worked in Nvidia Corp. investor relations, and you have the earnings a day early, and they are a surprise to the upside, what should you do with that information? Nothing, the answer is nothing, but here are some other hypothetical answers, none of which are legal advice:

1. Buy Nvidia stock and short-dated out-of-the-money call options, which will go up when the earnings are announced. I trust I do not have to explain to you why this is a bad idea. (It is illegal insider trading.)
2. Buy shares of other, correlated companies that also participate in the artificial intelligence boom, which will probably also go up when Nvidia announces good earnings. This is called “[shadow trading](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/a/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl1bcicJV0f_E2aUtt3kF9L77dxNcF7KcJAlwJY888KsZZk_ZRXnscPioxHW0IVq_GH352NMb6y25JFO-wkCa2MaGSdlywAYzSzJFYXPNcOkM7nFHDsv2M2psPLN-M7k_RLXbJSDbggYi_jEZ5bdOH_SFKw5OQ-vZSqdJ9tNqzlyEUud-Iea5gUOWVaHM_QA2m3zteYiRfxBiga50r-IcA3ycbnomy3Tq_Roc6PQjmkPsMCO4U0LmCkQjb9vYHiCoSEp1XtXrro7N4uiFRXrrjr9ICHbXzXHQXW1KV-wvj9SulhaUBZBJQhnEI0F9p8b21aDDhKyWkK0uh0jKMSUXGIVl_pSbYLKP_rPLrma1izBvcxCWmRnFfo_Nnq7cY5G2wQik_XGLHL0_fmVorItVyhorZGoS3kALbR04dINOlIzlleJtNtqTeP8sQEsdNngFcA%3D%3D),” and is also probably a bad idea, though less of a bad idea than Option 1.
3. Buy _index funds_ based on the S&P 500 index of large US stocks, or perhaps the more tech-focused Nasdaq 100 index, which will also probably go up when Nvidia announces good earnings. In part because Nvidia is a big component of both indexes, so if its stock goes up a lot that will mechanically move the index up, but also in part because you expect other stocks in those indexes to react positively to Nvidia’s news. If Nvidia earnings are “one of the most important events on the macro calendar,” and you know the earnings ahead of time, presumably you could make some macro bets. This strikes me as about as bad an idea as Option 2, basically [another form of shadow trading](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/a/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl1bcicJV0f_E2aUtt3kF9L77dxNcF7KcJAlwJY888KsZgEvkFxbC4eizvmioE2jgu8xdgACKq0tJ1g5XnSZLcdAUtbbQcJoW59CTxJE3avvZjNELIXKGtZJlEl-tWBh8Bn3A0b7Yu7OOW0hBCEsinaWFpHo7nvm6t1ARvsKdaaV82UMCHYvhefpeIvFsBaBgihSEis33JV_hRdwphob9HUT9_KEFDvGFt0TG5mrRifacsOk7bf2YkjmiAENnTXLg7Fg5N4F5u0oVa-uXpsg_IQ8-0k48Xh5Vl-3sJwf4l06g-g1E9yc_gpjDnOh8QIQ-uaXsZTLc4jn203bwtwK08rcbEL231VDbM2QYKmxoBMk8C2hII7N3Fy9nsQq0Vn8xW8kIqTOd74Ukuqoug-Zzj2ZNLgqH7v0SDe701-TdYaQg).
4. Short Treasury bonds? Long the dollar? Long oil? In fact there does not seem to be much correlation between Nvidia and those sorts of macroeconomic variables but, if it did work, this would be a fun novelty in shadow trading.

Again I do not think that doing any of these things, as an Nvidia employee with early access to earnings, would be all that great of an idea, but this is not legal advice, the rules seem a bit ambiguous, and if you are doing any of this stuff please do email me about it. [[3]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E8518#footnote-3)  But [the basic rule](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/a/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl1bcicJV0f_E2aUtt3kF9L77dxNcF7KcJAlwJY888KsZsM2IcFtPsG-SCieGbfrpu-honap3j9ypTS7MusCIWhU8WAYXiSiFJJwRRGhVz6aQ9JiMTX5jLO-a7t3PJQBX7tmTRvtRnhfJV4bGLvH8dwxrtYnyIok5ZdcD4rTJn411MkO-FtWD-vZdUk9OYdv5aRoJJDA-qm9yXwZlCEo67ilvc8RlEw_ceCj1E2JfO-jxpUytJQ87PDz5AQnIf04REZiWeAW7oxCmMRZLDzZu1MObEEhu3e62kRHysWhKnci-5vetcrGqNicls3oVueR8HZ9BfpqRomHbUwQK8xEwMzezsLk-r2WOMErKQnyk4WSpo000727s4NZbJBVhpj9CGfgvZhkmDB1WbGK6qBCIT7kvLCGvDANzmMD0V3paqsew) seems to be that if you get material nonpublic information about Nvidia in the course of your work at Nvidia, you have a _duty to Nvidia_ not to trade on it for your own profit, whether “trade on it” means “trade Nvidia stock” or “trade index funds.”

But here’s the other question: What about _Nvidia_? If you are Nvidia’s chief financial officer, and you have the earnings a day early, and they are a surprise to the upside, and you manage more than $30 billion of cash and marketable securities on Nvidia’s [balance sheet](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/u/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl25my5nwWnCRrVx0L1mPXDyf-pexvZ39_TYfrHzz0NcvOO0trdr5uq08Hvf6VhakxjMFzghZ6OvDLx_7b4ceej5vGC8iJjGVw_RpTFmj0lf6jCG3l4_C1Q-yqqRPOHvbBou6ecDB_RBqREFSZSBAkEmiKA1uaML4vkCGicAKZPaRUL_4dy7ViIEv5NhAm7pUcWhISduoPM5NjSLM-h7O04FHBZlstV5AYiOkTNxSxLDaTGkmHuUf5IEhkwjNprvJJcKbC4IIyMJhw7rABiM9Qm0EPwNcH0Ju0x4LDuHfD-nQ), would you be just the littlest bit tempted to make some trades? Not in Nvidia stock, of course — that’s insider trading — but in S&P 500 funds? Put the $30 billion into the S&P for a day, make 2% ($600 million), it’s not _that_ much — Nvidia’s net income was almost $15 billion last quarter — but still that’s like a 4% boost to your quarterly earnings. And surely Nvidia has no duty _to itself_ not to use its own information to make macro bets? [[4]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E8518#footnote-4)  

I mean, it’s probably not worth it: The market rewards Nvidia for earning money by selling chips, not by doing sketchy stock trades, and it’s possible that the multiple the market would put on these earnings would be negative. (“They’re distracted from their core mission and are just making stock market bets now, sell!”) If you’re Nvidia’s CFO, you’re probably busy managing its gusher of earnings and/or [being rich yourself](https://links.message.bloomberg.com/a/click?_t=f574328d4d0c4c359b90d8e49b10e21d&_m=bcacf955749f4ea49b00d9df2256859c&_e=2xa8JtLHUmefwbDePM2vl1bcicJV0f_E2aUtt3kF9L4zZ64WMBmfVW8_NMbHJcYGaJpKRgzwYesBXgmC_ooeDbbXKq4TeEVjDNirLz2YatqY2lTjuW7yJxDNRaFNoe2B5_9qO5LtHhKkLkZ3GfpZG20qo7Xh2UC5CXgAEFQ_YJ1Zc8OiJ-DD_VI9NGrKhp2K0ReqHblZSLPikt-OdQwBPD9IbSADa6Gyn10xc66cmdFtMSWdrBMvo5KOXyOS-tNPU2A8iBtVKk01XGdU4Bpq-drggnSga5E6wOg-UfNMgUh7LmoRLI8Qc3XJDh8jud2oyvfHIyO0V4sokkBQzQTDZrydU-8v6mtHhxDw73_vHSHNMO4s9TWBW42HJ-w0wmGFWanLIW4Fd5x0Sx4rCTTg86j1te1_f7NyVnfbEu9_HSrSC3TV_vIE2Gl0dVfiawX6DmJg8oNMU6GG58ro_791C09v0732W9cazoA2nuGCk2RY8Lgc3Za1mKNyF5Sl15IP); why spend your time on a little light shadow trading? Still it is weird for a company to generate its own important macro news, and if _I_ were able to generate my own macro news, I’d probably use it to make macro bets.




[3] Don’t, actually; I’ll probably get subpoenaed.

[4] Not legal advice. I suppose buying the S&P index — where Nvidia itself is a component — is arguably a form of insider trading, since it mechanically results in buying of Nvidia’s own stock. (Companies are not supposed to trade their own stock while in possession of material nonpublic information like earnings.) Buying a dozen correlated companies is maybe cleaner, though if they are customers you’d worry a little about whether you have any material nonpublic information *about them* (and a duty not to trade on it). Making interest-rate bets is cleaner still, but I’m not sure there’s enough correlation for it to work.

