
## Shadow trading

Insider trading, [I like to say](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTktMDMtMTMveW91LWhhdmUtdG8tcGF5LXRoZS1yaWdodC1wZXJzb24_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9e799341), is not about fairness: It’s about theft. In the US, most of the time, it is illegal to trade on inside information about a company not because that’s unfair to everyone else who doesn’t have the information, but because you have some _duty_ to somebody else not to misuse their information. So if you work for a public company, you have a duty to the shareholders not to trade on inside information before disclosing it to them. Or if you are the [spouse](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDItMjYvaG9uZXktaS1pbnNpZGVyLXRyYWRlZC15b3VyLW1lcmdlcj9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B94c8c332) or [golf buddy](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS92aWV3L2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTQtMDctMTEvc2VjLXByb3RlY3RzLWludGVncml0eS1vZi1tYXJrZXRzLWFsc28tZ29sZj9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B40eec714) or therapist of an executive at a public company, and she tells you about an upcoming deal, you have a “[duty of trust or confidence](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubGF3LmNvcm5lbGwuZWR1L2Nmci90ZXh0LzE3LzI0MC4xMGI1LTI/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bc337ce3a)” to her not to go trade on it, and if you do that’s a crime.

But if you don’t have a duty to keep the information confidential, probably you can go ahead and trade on it. (Nothing here is legal advice!) Some important, though somewhat hazy and controversial, examples:

1. If you are an old friend of an executive at a public company, and you go out to drinks with her and she tells you “ugh I’ve been working so hard, we’re getting acquired,” probably you have a duty to keep that information confidential, and if you trade on it that’s a crime. But if you are just some random person sitting at the next table and you _overhear_ her saying that, you have no duty of trust and confidence to her, and you [can probably trade](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTgtMTItMDMvaW5zaWRlci10cmFkaW5nLWluLXRoZS1wb3RhdG8tdHJhZGU_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bc6ab8353).
2. If a corporate raider or strategic acquirer or Warren Buffett is planning to propose a takeover of a public company, and you are working on the deal, you have a duty to the acquirer to keep the deal confidential, and if you go out and buy some call options that’s a crime. But if the acquirer _itself_ quietly buys some stock — a “toehold” — before making the proposal public, that’s probably fine: The acquirer has no inside information _about the company_; it only has inside information _about its own plans_, and can do what it wants with those. Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Inc. is allowed to buy a stake in a company and then announce that stake, rather than the reverse; it is allowed to trade knowing its own intentions. 
3. In fact, if the acquirer _wants_ to share that information with somebody else, so that _they_ will buy shares to support its bid, it [can probably do that](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTQtMDQtMjIvYmlsbC1hY2ttYW4tZ2V0cy1pbnRvLXRoZS1ob3N0aWxlLXRha2VvdmVyLWJ1c2luZXNzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MzAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUzMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd63523ca), though this one is [more controversial](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTQtMDMtMjgvc2hvdWxkLWFjdGl2aXN0LXNoYXJlaG9sZGVycy1iZS1hbGxvd2VkLXRvLXRhbGstdG8tdGhlaXItYnVkZGllcz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bdf5c076a). (In particular it does not work with [tender offers](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS92aWV3L2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTQtMDgtMDEvYWxsZXJnYW4tZG9lc24tdC13YW50LXRvLXNlbGwtdG8tYS1idW5jaC1vZi1pbnNpZGVyLXRyYWRlcnM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2526156d).) But the acquirer’s information belongs to it, and if it wants to _give it away_, insider trading law can’t stop it.

Again, not legal advice.

Last month, the US Securities and Exchange Commission [won an insider trading](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMDgvcHVibGljLW1hcmtldHMtYXJlLXRoZS1uZXctcHJpdmF0ZS1tYXJrZXRzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MzAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUzMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B22830f96) case against Matthew Panuwat, who worked at a public company called Medivation Inc., which was acquired by Pfizer Inc. in 2016. Panuwat [found out about the deal](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMDgtMjMvc3BhYy1zdWl0LWxlYWRzLXRvLXNwYXJjcz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B6f63a5ce) ahead of time, and did _not_ trade Medivation stock. (That would be illegal!) Instead, he bought call options on Incyte Corp., a competitor to Medivation, apparently on the theory that when the Medivation deal was announced Incyte’s stock would also go up. It did, and he made money. The SEC argued that (1) he had material nonpublic information _about Incyte_ (something like “its competitor would be acquired and its stock would go up”), (2) he got that information _from Medivation_ and (3) he had a duty _to Medivation_ to keep it confidential and not trade on it. Therefore, the SEC said, it was illegal insider trading — theft of Medivation’s information — for him to trade Incyte options. And a jury agreed. This — trading one stock using inside information about another stock — is [often called](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMDgtMjUvaW5zaWRlcnMtdHJhZGUtaW4tb3V0c2lkZS1jb21wYW5pZXM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf35fed46) “[shadow trading](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDEtMjYvd2F0Y2gtb3V0LWZvci1zaGFkb3ctdHJhZGluZz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B06b2fa28).”

Where did the SEC get the idea that Panuwat had a duty to Medivation to keep this information about Incyte confidential? Well, because that was his explicit agreement with Medivation. It was in Medivation’s insider trading policy, [which said](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9hc3NldHMuYndieC5pby9kb2N1bWVudHMvdXNlcnMvaXFqV0hCRmRmeElVL3JOeDczMXlwUzc0OC92MA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B1095a01e):

> During the course of your employment ... you may receive important information that is not yet publicly disseminated ... about the Company. … Because of your access to this information, you may be in a position to profit financially by buying or selling or in some other way dealing in the Company’s securities ... or the securities of another publicly traded company, including all significant collaborators, customers, partners, suppliers, or competitors of the Company. ... For anyone to use such information to gain personal benefit ... is illegal.

Medivation’s policies said that he was not allowed to use information he got about Medivationto trade other stocks. Therefore, the SEC argued — and a judge and jury agreed — when Panuwat did that, he was violating the policy; he was stealing information from Medivation. Therefore he was guilty of insider trading under federal law.

Fine. But that was just Medivation’s choice. If Medivation’s policy hadn’t had the “or the securities of another publicly traded company” bit, then I _think_ the SEC would not have had a case. (Still not legal advice! And I think the SEC disagrees. [[1]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E6017#footnote-1) ) I [wrote last month](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMDgvcHVibGljLW1hcmtldHMtYXJlLXRoZS1uZXctcHJpdmF0ZS1tYXJrZXRzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MzAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUzMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C22830f96):

> Not every company has a policy like that; some have policies saying, for instance, “don’t use inside information to trade our stock,” without mentioning competitors. For [all](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMjIvZG9lcy1tYXJrLXp1Y2tlcmJlcmctb3duLXRvby1tdWNoLW1ldGE_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bea1dd678) I [know](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDMtMTYvY3JlZGl0LXN1aXNzZS1wdXRzLW9uLWEtYnJhdmUtZmFjZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9cd8370f) some companies might _encourage_ their executives to trade competitors’ stocks. The meaning of Panuwat might be something like “shadow trading is illegal if your company tells you it is.”

I will say, when I wrote that, I heard from a number of readers to the effect of “actually most companies have a policy like that.” For instance, here are a [paper](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXBlcnMuc3Nybi5jb20vc29sMy9wYXBlcnMuY2ZtP2Fic3RyYWN0X2lkPTQ2MzQ0ODA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B114e0b9b) and related [blog post](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9jb3JwZ292Lmxhdy5oYXJ2YXJkLmVkdS8yMDI0LzAxLzE2L3N0cmF0ZWdpYy1jb21wbGlhbmNlLw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B134937d0) by Geeyoung Min of Michigan State University finding that “approximately seventy-six percent of the disclosed, stand-alone insider trading policies from S&P 500 companies prohibit the trading of any other publicly traded companies’ stock based on MNPI [material nonpublic information].” And here is a [client memo from Cleary Gottlieb](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9jbGllbnQuY2xlYXJ5Z290dGxpZWIuY29tLzUxLzMyMzYvdXBsb2Fkcy8yMDI0LTA0LTEwLWp1cnktZGVjaXNpb24tbGVuZHMtc3VwcG9ydC1mb3Itc2hhZG93LWluc2lkZXItdHJhZGluZy10aGVvcnkucGRm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B12139e9e), written shortly after the Panuwat verdict, saying that “companies should consider expanding their insider trading policies to expressly prohibit trading in their own securities and securities of others that could be impacted by MNPI acquired in the course of their employment.”

But … why? Medivation was not _actually harmed_ by Panuwat’s trading in Incyte’s stock. [[2]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E6017#footnote-2)  Perhaps, as a matter of, like, fairness, or being friendly with the SEC, companies really should have policies saying “you can’t shadow trade in our competitors’ stocks.” But perhaps as a matter of employee relations (and keeping the employees out of trouble), companies should instead have policies saying “go ahead and shadow trade in our competitors’ stocks, that is explicitly allowed by our policies, have fun.” Why would a company want to have a policy that could send its employees to jail for doing something that doesn’t hurt the company?

At Bloomberg Law today, [Matthew Bultman reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9uZXdzLmJsb29tYmVyZ2xhdy5jb20vdXMtbGF3LXdlZWsvY29tcGFuaWVzLXJldGhpbmstaW5zaWRlci10cmFkaW5nLXBvbGljaWVzLWFmdGVyLW5vdmVsLXNlYy13aW4/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B6051495e):

> The Wall Street regulator’s victory, likely to eventually reach a federal appeals court, is forcing companies to take a second look at their own insider trading policies. Some have expanded those policies to explicitly address shadow trading, according to a Bloomberg Law search. Others are considering narrowing their prohibitions, hoping to limit employees’ exposure. …
> 
> Now, some companies are considering narrowing their policies, wary of exposing their employees to similar liability.
> 
> “From the SEC’s perspective, that is perhaps an unintended consequence of the Panuwat case,” [Morrison & Foerster LLP lawyer Edward] Imperatore said.
> 
> But other companies have already moved in the opposite direction, underscoring the difficult decisions firms face.
> 
> At least some insider trading policies now include the term “shadow trading” and reference the _Panuwat_ case, a Bloomberg Law review of company disclosures found.

The theory of narrowing the policy seems fairly straightforward: Why get your employees in trouble unnecessarily? The theory of broadening the policy is something like “well, if the employees shadow trade, the SEC is going to go after them anyway, and you want to look like you have  effective policies against insider trading so the SEC doesn’t get mad at you too”:

> Companies can be liable for insider trading by their employees, and may have viewed the broad language as a way to minimize potential liability, [Geeyoung] Min said. If regulators or prosecutors came knocking, companies could argue their policies went beyond what was required. ...
> 
> Lawyers who urge companies to explicitly restrict shadow trading in their policies note there may have been other reasons Panuwat found himself in hot water: the SEC also argued he had a duty to avoid trading on the merger news, even absent Medivation’s policy, because the company entrusted him with confidential information.

But I am not so sure; I do kind of think that the right reading of Panuwat is that it’s illegal if the policy says it is and not if it doesn’t. Which, sure, is weird:

> Under that logic, whether a person’s trade is illegal may depend on what’s in their employer’s insider trading policy, legal scholars said.
> 
> “That does seem to give companies too much discretion to make a special law for themselves and themselves only,” said Columbia law professor John Coffee, whose specialties include securities regulation and white collar crime. “The criminal law doesn’t like the idea of different scopes depending upon the decision of the corporate issuer.”

Yes, in general, it is odd to have criminal law that companies get to make for themselves. But that’s how insider trading law works!

[1] This April [Cleary Gottlieb memo](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35548615.276783/aHR0cHM6Ly9jbGllbnQuY2xlYXJ5Z290dGxpZWIuY29tLzUxLzMyMzYvdXBsb2Fkcy8yMDI0LTA0LTEwLWp1cnktZGVjaXNpb24tbGVuZHMtc3VwcG9ydC1mb3Itc2hhZG93LWluc2lkZXItdHJhZGluZy10aGVvcnkucGRm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C12139e9e) says that “the SEC’s theory also relied on common law principles of agency that would not require breach of an insider trading policy or employment agreement.” But I suppose the company could *expressly waive* those principles, saying “we’d love for you to trade competitors’ stocks, have fun.”

[2] Could you tell a story? Something like “Panuwat’s buying of Incyte options, if it was big enough, could have pushed up the price of Incyte, which would have alerted the market to possible deal activity in the sector, which could have pushed up the price of Medivation stock, which could have made Pfizer get nervous and walk away from the deal”? This strikes me as not crazy, in the general case, though clearly not true in Panuwat's specific case. But the point is that the company gets to decide how worried it is about stuff like this.
