
Is An Investigative Role as a Child Sex Crime Detective Incongruent with Christian Faith? — Dr. Mohler Responds to Letters from Listeners of The Briefing

Now we’re going to turn to questions, and sometimes you get what you ask for. I invite listeners to write in questions, and they range across an incredible range of issues, and some frankly are easier to address than others. But sometimes there’s a question that’s hard to address, and you realize this is really important. In this case, it’s coming from a brother in Christ who works as an undercover police investigator and police officer, and with the assignment of helping to fight child sex trafficking in the United States, something like 15 years of experience. Here’s what he’s asking. He identifies as a Baptist, as an evangelical Christian who goes to a biblical church. He’s struggling with an issue of conscience, and he’s asking about some of the investigative techniques that police have to use in order to discover and detect and then confront and arrest those who are involved in the sexual exploitation of children.

I’m not going to use the language over and over again, but I do want us to know what we’re talking about. And in particular, this undercover police detective writes to say that even as he works in this area, one of the questions of conscience is the fact that he has to sometimes pose as someone he is not in order to discover who it is that is behind this business. He wants to know if that’s something a Christian should do or not. He writes this: “I know that Christ wants me always to act honorably and not to deceive, but to speak truth. I know that I’ll be called into account for all that I say and do.” But he says this: “I also know that every day there are thousands of children getting exploited and trafficked. I also know that Christ wants us to be a light.”

Now, I want to say to this police officer that as unique as your question is, it’s not unique in the history of Christian moral theology to the modern police and detective fight against international child trafficking and child pornography. There is more to it than that. There’s a longer moral traditional, a longer moral argument than that. And it goes back, for example, to the context of war, and to the question as to whether or not subterfuge can be used as a legitimate tool of warfare.

You have someone like Winston Churchill during World War II who spoke honestly of this by saying that the truth is so important that it must be surrounded by what he called a bodyguard of lies. Which is to say that if he told Hitler where he was going to invade, where the Allies were going to invade on D-Day, Hitler would’ve been able to defeat the Allied forces and Nazi Germany would still be in power. And by the way, this gets to the point that there are more ways to lie than with the mouth. Then you’ll recall that the Allies came up with brilliant subterfuge, such as at one point dropping a dead body with information which were actually wrongful, that is to say deceitful, war plans in order that the Nazis retrieved the body and thought that they had received this great cache of information and espionage, when it turned out it was a plant, a dead body. And that man, by the way, must be thanked posthumously for the fact that even in death, he served the cause of liberty.

It also comes down to the fact that George S. Patton at the time who was out of sorts with the Supreme Allied Commander, Dwight Eisenhower, had been assigned to put together a phony army complete with inflatable tanks so that Nazi spies would see what amounts to a lying inflatable army and think that it was amassed across the channel where the invasion would take place. It was a lie, but it was a lie that helped to save Western Civilization.

Now, you could look at the moral theory of pragmatism or utilitarianism and say, “Well, that’s all you need to know. If it worked out well, then guess what? It was morally justified.” Christians can’t give ourselves to that. We can’t say just because it worked, that it served a good purpose, it was legitimate. But it has to be put in a larger frame.

Let’s move from, say, espionage, and think about the detection of a criminal network. That’s what we’re talking about here with the work of this police officer, this detective, and others who work with him. At times, you are working with the level of truth that you can demonstrate to people who deserve the level of truth. Which is to say it is not a part of our Christian calling to use the necessity of telling the truth in such a way that we bring about grave damage to others simply by making them vulnerable.

I’ll be blunt. I do not believe that the people who were hiding Jews during World War II from the Nazis were obligated by Biblical command to tell the people coming in as Nazi officers where to find the Jews so that they could kill them. I think that’s absolute moral nonsense. There, on the other hand, are circumstances in which as we think about our obedience to Scriptural commands, including to be the people of the truth, we have to ask, “Okay, what does that demand of us?” And I will argue that the lengthy discussion of the Christian church on this question, on this issue, a great struggle, a lot of Biblical struggle, a lot of theological and ethical struggle. I think the consensus is actually a wise consensus, and I think it is rooted in the Scripture itself. Let me just mention Rahab and the spies. It is rooted in the fact that you must be a person of truth such that the truth must out. The truth must be told.

I was just telling you about the deceitful army there in the south of Britain. I’ve told you about the deceit of the dead body. I have told you about the fact that sometimes deceit and subterfuge and espionage are used in the context of war. And the big question we ask morally is, “Was it justified? And was the truth eventually honored?” Did this lead to greater righteousness and greater truth, or did it lead to less righteousness and less truth?

Now, I want to be careful to say this doesn’t justify what we would call lying. It does understandably concede the fact that there are persons who have criminal intent, murderous intent, genocidal intent, who do not deserve the truth. And, it doesn’t mean that the person is unaccountable to the truth. It means that the truth must be told in the right way to the right people and the rightful authorities at the right time. That’s the ultimate test.

Here’s where I want to remind this police detective, and I want to thank you for your work. I want to say that where it is most important that you get the story straight, and you know what I’m going to say, is in the courtroom when you give testimony, because that’s where you are speaking in a context in which the truth can be told and must be told, and for the sake of moral judgment throughout eternity, must be told rightly. That’s where the issue, I think, comes to the clearest test: the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. I don’t believe that you owe that to a Nazi killer; I do believe you owe that to a righteous judge.

I also want to finish by saying to this police detective, again, I want to say this from the bottom of my heart, thank you for taking on. I will tell you that I’ve been in situations in which I’ve traveled around the world, traveled around the United States, and after I’ve spoken somewhere, I’ve had someone come up. This happened to me not too many years ago in a context in which I had persons who were involved in targeting responsibilities for the American military who just very clearly were asking me questions about moral responsibility. And I was so thankful that I didn’t just start out at ground zero. But I could turn to Scripture and I could turn to the moral consideration of the Christian church over a period of centuries, going all the way back to soldiers serving in Caesar’s army, where there really has been a very strong Christian consensus that I think is clearly grounded in Christian theology. And I think it’s just unfair to say to someone who is in one of these excruciatingly difficult situations as a brother or sister in Christ.Even though I’m not in that situation, I’m not in that profession, I’m going to tell you exactly how I think you have to act in such a way, given the complexity of some of these questions.

That’s one of the reasons why I have two other words I want to say. And by the way, the man who wrote this question very kindly also indicated that he’s a part of a gospel church and is a part of the accountability in that gospel church. I would say for Christians, one of the most important things is we must speak to our brothers and sisters in Christ appropriately, but certainly the elders in the leadership of the church in such a way that we go to them with this kind of question and say, “I just want to make sure I’m doing the right thing. I want to make sure that I’m being a faithful Christian.”

The other thing is that sometimes we have to know that Christians are called to act in which we know that there is no way to handle this situation, as horrible as it is, with absolutely clean hands. I think that is the predicament that even you find in the New Testament, but you clearly find it in early Church Fathers like Augustine dealing with soldiers working on behalf of Rome. Sometimes a soldier finds himself in an excruciatingly difficult situation, and sometimes there is no way for him not to act in a way that he hopes is right rather than wrong or righter, to abuse the language, rather than wronger.

Eventually, we as believers know we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and there, all things will be revealed. All of us on that day are going to discover that sometimes we got these things wrong, but by God’s grace, let’s do our very best to get them right.

But finally, I want to say, and I think this might be helpful to parents and others who might be talking about this with their children and teenagers, college students and others, I think you might want to consider a conversation that I was privileged to have with James Olson from my program Thinking in Public about these very issues. And let me just tell you, James Olson was director of counterintelligence for the Central Intelligence Agency. He ran lead on these kinds of issues for the CIA and was deeply embedded as a spy when his cover was blown. Let me just tell you, having a conversation with him on these issues is very different than having a conversation in a seminar room. We’ll make certain the link to that program is put up with the posting for today’s program.
