
## FTX!

At some point in early 2022, crypto exchange FTX Trading Ltd. apparently had an equity value of $32 billion, based on the price it got in a [fundraising round](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/01/31/ftx-reaches-32b-valuation-with-400m-fundraise/). By November 2022, FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried was shopping it around at an equity value of $0; he [_almost_ found a buyer](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-10/ftx-is-still-looking-for-money) at $0, but couldn't quite make it work. FTX had assets (a bunch of crypto tokens, some venture stakes, a surprising amount of Bahamas real estate), and it had liabilities (it owed its customers a lot of crypto tokens), and it had some sort of going-concern franchise value (if it kept operating a crypto exchange, it could keep charging fees and making money). In early 2022, the assets _seemed_ to be worth more than the liabilities, and the franchise value - FTX's large steady profits, and the prospect of more in the future as it expanded - was high, leading to a $32 billion equity valuation. In late 2022, [the assets turned out to be largely magic beans](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-14/ftx-s-balance-sheet-was-bad), the liabilities were high, and FTX's time as a trusted profitable crypto exchange seemed to be over. The result is that no one was willing to pay $0 to take on FTX's assets and liabilities and franchise: Any buyer would have to cash out FTX's customers, and there weren't enough assets to do that.

Or, I mean, that's how it seemed. Sam Bankman-Fried, before he went to jail, consistently argued that that wasn't true, that if he had had another 24 hours he _could_ have found a buyer to acquire FTX for at least $0 and make all of the customers whole. That has always sounded extremely unlikely, given how carelessly FTX handled customer money and how hideous its balance sheet looked at the time of its implosion. But he kept saying it.

In 2024, on the other hand, Bloomberg's Steven Church and Jonathan Randles [report](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-31/ftx-expects-to-repay-customers-in-full-bankruptcy-lawyer-says):

> Customers and creditors of bankrupt crypto exchange FTX who can prove their losses will likely get back all of their money, the company told the judge overseeing the insolvency case.
> 
> Restructuring advisers will need to examine the millions of claims that have been filed against FTX to weed out those that are not legitimate, lawyer Andrew Dietderich said during a Wednesday court hearing in Wilmington, Delaware.
> 
> "I would like the court and stakeholders to understand this not as a guarantee, but as an objective," Dietderich said. "There is still a great amount of work, and risk, between us and that result. But we believe the objective is within reach and we have a strategy to achieve it."
> 
> In addition, the team overseeing the company has dropped an effort to restart or sell the FTX crypto exchange after concluding it would cost too much, Dietderich said. Advisers ran an exhaustive process to find investors willing to restart FTX.com, but nobody would put up the cash needed to revive the exchange, he said.
> 
> "The costs and risks of creating a viable exchange from what Mr. Bankman-Fried left in the dumpster were simply too high," Dietderich said, referencing founder Sam Bankman-Fried, who shut down the crypto firm and handed control to insolvency experts in late 2022.

That last paragraph says that the franchise value is still $0. It turns out that, still, nobody wants to trade on the FTX exchange; its stream of trading fees is extinguished forever.

But the pile of magic beans and real estate that FTX had at the end of 2022 turned out to be worth more than its liabilities? The roughly $8 billion hole that FTX's affiliated trading firm, Alameda Research, blew in its balance sheet got … filled up? The customer money all turned out to be there? FTX was worth less than $0 in November 2022, but has somehow become far more valuable in bankruptcy?

It's weird. There are several explanations for what has changed between November 2022 and now. For one thing, crypto prices collapsed alongside FTX, and by the time Bankman-Fried was looking for buyers, the value of its crypto holdings was low. Now crypto prices are up, which helps on the asset side. It _should_ hurt _more_ on the liabilities side - if FTX owes customers Bitcoin, that debt is worth more now than it was in 2022 - except that that's not how the bankruptcy accounting works. FTX's [bankruptcy plan](file:///home/d/Downloads/c938fc63-d52f-493a-9ec4-cc5e97ec405c.pdf) provides for "the valuation of claims in U.S. dollars as of the Petition Date" (Nov. 11, 2022) and payment in cash. If FTX owed you one Bitcoin before it collapsed, now it owes you roughly $17,000 (the value of a Bitcoin on Nov. 11, 2022). If FTX _had_ one Bitcoin before it collapsed, now it has about $43,000 (the value of a Bitcoin today). If FTX had enough Bitcoins to pay off half of its customers' claims in 2022, now it has enough to pay off all of them.

I'm not sure that's the main mechanism. By the time of its collapse FTX _didn't_ really have much Bitcoin; [its crypto holdings](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-09-13/yieldstreet-missed-a-boat) were largely "Samcoins" associated with Bankman-Fried that have not recovered nearly as much value. But a big chunk of FTX's holdings were [in Solana, which _has_ rallied a lot](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-12-20/ftx-claims-reach-73-cents-on-the-dollar-on-claims-market-platform). And FTX's bankruptcy estate [apparently dumped $1 billion](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2024/01/22/ftx-sold-about-1b-of-grayscales-bitcoin-etf-explaining-much-of-outflow-sources/) of the Grayscale Bitcoin exchange-traded fund this month, profiting from the rise in Bitcoin prices since 2022. So rising crypto prices have definitely helped.

For another thing, FTX has, like, posthumously pivoted to AI? In April 2022, Bankman-Fried invested $500 million of FTX/Alameda's money into Anthropic, a somewhat obscure artificial intelligence startup. That was kind of a reckless thing to do with _customer demand deposits_, putting them into an illiquid speculative equity investment in futuristic technology. It did _work out_, however: AI is huge now, Anthropic is a big player, and FTX's stake is [probably worth billions of dollars](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-10-05/ftx-might-have-found-some-money). Bankman-Fried's [whole schtick](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-10-04/sbf-was-reckless-from-the-start), for most of his career, was about taking terrifying risks that somehow worked out. "Let's take our customers' money and secretly put it into venture investments in an AI startup" is a _terrifying_ risk, an insane thing to do, and yet it worked out! Not for Bankman-Fried, though; he's in jail.

Also there's the real estate? Generally speaking, FTX seems to have siphoned off a ton of money into fancy apartments for its executives, big [vanity investments](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-06-26/ftx-spent-big-on-celebrity) in their friends' companies, inflated endorsement deals with celebrities, and other reckless spending. When Bankman-Fried was shopping FTX to buyers in 2022, he didn't count this stuff as FTX assets, because it mostly wasn't: The money had been paid out to realtors and friends and celebrities. But the bankruptcy team generally argues that this stuff _does_ belong to FTX, that it ended up in the hands of FTX's executives and friends and family illegitimately, and they are trying to get it back. They might succeed with some of it. If your model of FTX is "Sam Bankman-Fried stole a lot of customer money and used it to buy luxury apartments," that's actually pretty good news for customers, because you can seize the apartments and sell them and give the money back to the customers. Whereas "Sam Bankman-Fried lost customer money gambling on crypto" would mean it's probably gone.

Also there is just a due diligence layer here that probably matters for valuation. The bankruptcy executives who currently control FTX are humorless types who [care a lot about careful accounting](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-17/matt-levine-s-money-stuff-ftx-was-not-very-careful) and who report regularly to a court. When they say things like "we found $300 million of assets under a couch cushion," people are inclined to believe it. When they want to sell stuff, they run a slow and heavily lawyered sales process that lets multiple buyers kick the tires, and the buyers can have some confidence in what they are buying.

When Sam Bankman-Fried tried to sell FTX for $0, he had a [slapdash and terrifying spreadsheet](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-14/ftx-s-balance-sheet-was-bad) that emphasized the "Hidden, poorly internally labeled 'fiat@' account" with a balance of negative $8 billion. If you are a potential buyer, and you get that spreadsheet along with a text message like "hey FYI I need your final binding bid in two hours or it's off to jail with me," you might not be inclined to make an aggressive bid? You might think "hmm negative $8 billion is a suspiciously round number, what if there are _other_ hidden liabilities here that I don't know about and can't find out about in two hours?" You might just pass. It's possible that FTX really _was_ worth at least $0 the whole time, that even at its lowest point it had enough stuff lying around to pay back all its customers. It's just that Sam Bankman-Fried was in no position to make anyone believe that.

## FTXed

Elsewhere in crypto founders who "[f-ed up](https://www.businessinsider.com/sam-bankman-fried-planned-testimony-full-text-ftx-2022-12)" and [went on social media to apologize](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-03-15/sbf-considered-coming-out-as-a-republican-amid-ftx-collapse):

> Sam Bankman-Fried came up with a lot of ideas to rehabilitate his image and launch a new crypto exchange after FTX went into bankruptcy.
> 
> Bankman-Fried thought he might "Go on Tucker Carlson, come out as a republican;" "Come out against the woke agenda;" tell people the team running his bankrupt former company "has no idea how to run FTX;" tell people he's "really glad" the bankruptcy team stepped in and "they're great."
> 
> In a Google [document](https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.nysd.590940/gov.uscourts.nysd.590940.410.3_1.pdf), which prosecutors attached to a court filing seeking to put Bankman-Fried behind bars for as long as 50 years, the fallen crypto king considered having author Michael Lewis interview him on TV, asking people what to do in a Twitter poll and leaking a document to the press.

The [document](https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/rKOhRSDBz.ps/v0) lists 19 numbered "random probably bad ideas that aren't vetted." No. 12 is "Go head to head with Matt Levine on Odd Lots, really lean in to arguments." I don't think anyone will be surprised to hear that we (I and Joe Weisenthal and Tracy Alloway of Bloomberg's Odd Lots) also wanted this. We had a [few](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-06/transcript-sam-bankman-fried-and-matt-levine-on-crypto-market-structure) good [chats](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-04-25/odd-lots-full-transcript-sam-bankman-fried-and-matt-levine-on-crypto) with Bankman-Fried back before FTX collapsed, and I would have cleared my schedule to do it again in, you know, [November 2022](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-11-14/ftx-s-balance-sheet-was-bad). Tremendous content that would have been. It never happened; I'm not sure if that's because Bankman-Fried decided it was a bad idea, or his lawyers stopped him, or he was arrested before he could do it.

## FTX claims

One [story about crypto](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9mZWF0dXJlcy8yMDIyLXRoZS1jcnlwdG8tc3RvcnkvP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MjQyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYyNCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZiN0cnVzdA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B06136f51) is that it does away with the need for trust. Code is law, everything happens on a public immutable blockchain, and you don’t need to trust any central intermediary: You can _prove_ that you own your Bitcoins by pointing to the blockchain.

This was never quite true, as a practical matter. Some crypto investors do organize their lives around not having to trust anyone, but that is very inconvenient, and lots of crypto investors end up trusting people: You hold your crypto on a centralized exchange, not directly on a blockchain, and you trust the exchange to hold it for you. Or you _do_ hold your crypto on a blockchain, and use it in decentralized applications, and you trust that the smart contracts you use do what they say they will, without carefully auditing their code yourself. 

But it is possible that the philosophical trustlessness of crypto is somehow corrosive to actual trustworthiness. A lot of crypto exchanges turned out _not_ to be all that trustworthy. If a stock exchange collapsed and took customer money with it, people would go around saying “where were the regulators” and “we need better rules to prevent that.” When a crypto exchange collapses, some people go around saying those things, but other people go around saying things like “not your keys not your coins” or “if you didn’t know that that exchange was shady then really it’s your fault.” Or when Avi Eisenberg spotted a profitable opportunity to [manipulate the Mango Markets token](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMTAtMTIvZGVmaS1kaXNjb3ZlcnMtbmV3LW1hcmtldC1tYW5pcHVsYXRpb25zP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA2MjQyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDYyNCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B5d5466e3), he did that, because he was philosophically committed to an ethos of code-is-law and trustlessness, though [now he’s in jail](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMjIvdGhlLXNlY3JldC10cmFkZS13YXMtb3B0aW9ucy1pbi1pbmRpYT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf706d22b).

Similarly, if you are used to anonymous, trustless international transactions, and if you think of those transactions as being subject not to any nation’s laws but to “code is law,” and if you are used to transactions settling instantly on the blockchain, might you become … untrustworthy? Might you agree to a trade, and then renege on the trade when prices move in your favor, and say “well, that’s not a real trade, it wasn’t even on the blockchain”? I don’t know. The [Wall Street Journal reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud3NqLmNvbS9maW5hbmNlL2N1cnJlbmNpZXMvaGVkZ2UtZnVuZHMtZnR4LTIxMGI3ZjczP21vZD1ocF9sZWFkX3BvczM/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B778fee9e):

> Since FTX’s 2022 implosion, hedge funds had scooped up the rights to customers’ frozen accounts for pennies on the dollar, with five firms alone buying claims with a combined face value of about $2.4 billion. That meant a huge payday was in store.
> 
> But collecting these winnings won’t be straightforward. Investors are mired in legal battles with some of the original owners of the claims. They allege those former FTX customers abruptly reneged on trades and are suffering from an age-old affliction: seller’s remorse.
> 
> The FTX case has thrust investment firms, some for the first time, into the Wild West of crypto. Compared to typical bankruptcy cases—where investors buy claims from relatively staid corporate creditors—firms this time are instead cutting deals with crypto traders.
> 
> “We have sellers from all over the world that are interfacing with buyers and the bankruptcy court for the first time and have never experienced a U.S. Chapter 11 case,” said Andrew Glantz, chief strategy officer of Xclaim, a platform that has facilitated more than $200 million of FTX claims transactions. ...
> 
> Many sellers, including some sophisticated crypto players, are now demanding bigger payouts, according to court documents and people familiar with the matter. Others have tried to back out entirely, or have tried to find other buyers to take their claims.

FTX claims were trading at close to zero cents on the dollar when FTX first went bankrupt, and are now likely to pay back [at least 118 cents on the dollar](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMDgvZnR4LWZvdW5kLXRoZS1tb25leT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf7cbbc50). If you agreed to sell your claim at 30 cents on the dollar, but there was a long delay between the verbal agreement and finalizing the paperwork, then _arguably_ you had a free option: If the claim’s value fell to 20 cents, you’d close the deal and sell it for the 30 cents you agreed to, but if it rose to 50 cents, you’d find a problem with the paperwork and get out of the deal. [[3]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E6631#footnote-3)  And in fact it rose to 118 cents, and a lot of sellers seem to be trying to get out of their deals. Also:

> Tom Braziel, a claims broker, sold tens of millions of dollars of FTX claims to big investment firms like Oaktree Capital, Attestor and Silver Point Capital.
> 
> He said many of the sellers don’t have lawyers and “don’t realize that a verbal contract to sell a claim is binding under New York law, where most of these hedge funds are based.” 

Yes, right. One is tempted to say “if only these trades took place on the blockchain, then there would be no dispute about who owned them: Settlement would be instantaneous, and the claims would be tradeable tokens whose ownership could be proven based on an open, tamper-proof blockchain.” But of course people _have_ tried to build tokenized platforms for trading crypto bankruptcy claims. Most notably, the guys from Three Arrows Capital, the [famously imploded](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMTIvdGhyZWUtYXJyb3dzLWhhZC1hLWZ1bi1idWJibGU_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYyNDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjI0JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B69285800) crypto hedge fund, [were building one](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35821175.281761/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud2lyZWQuY29tL3N0b3J5L2NyeXB0by1iYW5rcnVwdGN5LW1hcmtldHMtdGhyaXZpbmctZnR4LWNvbGxhcHNlLw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B37f7d61b)! Surely you trust them, right?
