
## Staking

See, to me, spot Ether exchange traded funds are the _obvious_ way to do Ethereum staking? But Bloomberg’s [Muyao Shen reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMjIvYS1ob3QtYnV0dG9uLWlzc3VlLWZvci1zZWMtdGhyZWF0ZW5zLXRvLWVyb2RlLWV0aGVyLWV0Zi1kZW1hbmQ_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUyMzI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTIzJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb6a83674):

> Many in the crypto market believe that a key change made to some applications for proposed spot-Ether exchange traded funds will be good for the Ethereum blockchain, while putting the prospective ETF products themselves at a disadvantage.
> 
> Issuers including Fidelity Investments and Ark Investment Management have eliminated plans for “staking” the Ether they would purchase for the proposed funds if they’re approved. Staking is industry jargon for the mechanism that runs Ethereum and other so-called proof-of-stake blockchains. It involves locking up deposits of cryptocurrency in order to help validate transactions and secure the network in exchange for rewards paid for doing that work.
> 
> Staking has been a hot-button issue for Ether since it allows holders to collect a yield, which raises questions about whether the token should be treated as a security that falls under the purview of US regulators. Some market participants believe that if ETFs don’t stake their tokens, the funds will be less appealing to investors than buying Ether directly in the crypto market, where they are free to stake the tokens.
> 
> “There will be an immediate opportunity cost to holding Ether via a US ETF from forgone staking rewards,” said Brian Rudick, senior strategist at digital-asset firm GSR.

Here’s how I think of it. First, staking. Ethereum [is a cryptocurrency network](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9mZWF0dXJlcy8yMDIyLXRoZS1jcnlwdG8tc3RvcnkvP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MjMyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUyMyZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZiNhLWRpc3RyaWJ1dGVkLWNvbXB1dGVy/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bbff96961); people do transactions on Ethereum, but rather than some centralized agency (a bank, etc.) keeping the ledger of transactions, the ledger is kept in a decentralized way by lots of computers that run on the network. The way that this works is roughly that people broadcast their proposed transactions on the network, and every 10 seconds one computer on the network (the “proposer”) writes down a list of recent transactions in order, and the other computers on the network (the “validators”) vote to approve that list (a “block”), and if they all agree then the block is enshrined in the permanent ledger (the “blockchain”). We [talked about this system last week](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMTYvY3J5cHRvLWJyb3RoZXJzLWZyb250LXJhbi10aGUtZnJvbnQtcnVubmVycz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNTIzMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA1MjMmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B3ad54020), because some guys kind of hacked it.

The computers that get a vote on this — the proposer and validators — are those with a stake in the network, those with an economic incentive to make sure that it works. Specifically, they are “stakers”: People deposit some Ether, the currency of Ethereum, with the network, to get these voting rights. And then if they do bad stuff — propose fake lists, forget to vote, etc. — they lose some of their deposit, which is called “slashing.” But if they do good stuff — if they reach consensus on their blocks — they get “[staking rewards](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly9ldGhlcmV1bS5vcmcvZW4vZGV2ZWxvcGVycy9kb2NzL2NvbnNlbnN1cy1tZWNoYW5pc21zL3Bvcy9yZXdhcmRzLWFuZC1wZW5hbHRpZXMv/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8751cf4e),” in the form of additional Ether, which intuitively [come from transaction fees](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly9ldGhlcmV1bS5vcmcvZW4vZGV2ZWxvcGVycy9kb2NzL2dhcy8/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B7310b31b) paid by people who want to do transactions on Ether. These rewards are, crudely speaking, proportional to the amount of Ether that the stakers deposit; they tend to be expressed as an annual percentage yield. This morning [Coinbase tells me](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY29pbmJhc2UuY29tL2Vhcm4vc3Rha2luZy9ldGhlcmV1bQ/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B0967e3a3) that the rate is about 2.54%. 

All the stuff about keeping ledgers and voting sounds pretty active, but it doesn’t have to be. It is all algorithmic and done by computers. And so there is a marketplace in which, essentially, (1) I run computers to do the validating stuff, (2) you lend me your Ether to stake, (3) I collect the staking rewards from the validating and (4) I pass most of them on to you. You, here, are just a passive saver; you put your Ether into an account with me and get paid interest. The work of maintaining the Ethereum ledger is distributed among the holders of Ether, and the rewards of that work are also distributed among the holders, but those holders naturally delegate the work to people with more interest in doing it. 

If you hold Ether you don’t _have_ to be involved in any of this — “about 27% of the all outstanding Ether is staked,” reports Shen — but it is kind of free money? If you hold dollars, you don’t _have_ to put them in a high-yield savings account or a money market fund, but for a lot people that would make sense. Ethereum staking rewards, to many Ether holders, look more or less like bank account interest.

Next: “Questions about whether the token should be treated as a security that falls under the purview of US regulators.” There are a couple of levels of this. One is: If I run a staking _program_, in which I do the validating stuff and pay you a cut of the staking rewards, is _that offering_ a security? In practice, many of the people who run staking programs are _crypto exchanges_, for pretty natural reasons: Crypto exchanges have lots of retail customers who buy and hold Ether on their platforms. The exchanges are holding the customers’ Ether anyway. If they can put that Ether to work doing staking, they can earn an interest-like return on it, and then pass a lot of that interest on to their customers, making the customers happy. It’s a good product.

But the US Securities and Exchange Commission unambiguously believes that that product is a _security_, that the customers who deposit their Ether with Coinbase or Kraken or whomever, with the promise of earning interest, are _buying a security from the exchange_. The argument is [a standard one](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMDYvdGhlLXNlYy1jb21lcy1mb3ItY3J5cHRvP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MjMyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUyMyZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb4c1a6d6) in US crypto regulation: The customers are pooling their money based on the promise of profits from someone else’s efforts, which is the definition of a security. So, if the exchange wants to offer that to the public, to retail investors, it needs to register the securities with the SEC. The exchanges do not do that, and so the SEC goes around [shutting down](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDItMTMvdGhlLXNlYy1jcmFja3MtZG93bi1vbi1jcnlwdG8_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUyMzI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTIzJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd63e31af) exchanges’ staking-as-a-service programs.

The other level of this is: If Ethereum, as a network, pays staking rewards, does that make staked Ether (or all Ether) _itself_ a security? This is a harder question, to which I think the rough answer is “in its heart of hearts the SEC absolutely thinks Ether is a security, but it won’t come out and say that, because Ether has been sort of [grandfathered in](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMDcvd2hlbi1pcy1hLXRva2VuLW5vdC1hLXNlY3VyaXR5P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MjMyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUyMyZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb480f24b) as not a security, and the SEC would get a lot of blowback if it said that Ether trading was illegal.”

Finally: ETFs. The situation is roughly:

1. The SEC hates crypto and would like to block crypto spot ETFs, that is, ETFs that directly hold the underlying cryptocurrency.
2. But it [lost a court case over this](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMjkvZ3JheXNjYWxlLWNhbi1iZS1hLWJpdGNvaW4tZXRmP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MjMyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUyMyZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2b82a78f) and was forced to [approve spot Bitcoin ETFs](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDEtMTEvYml0Y29pbi1ldGZzLWFyZS1oZXJlLWZvci1yZWFsP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA1MjMyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDUyMyZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bea45701f). (Bitcoin has no staking mechanism.)
3. Now, issuers are asking it to approve spot Ether ETFs, and since it approved Bitcoin ETFs it has no particularly principled reason to say no.
4. _But_ there is a distinction between Ether and Bitcoin, which is that Ether _can_ be staked.
5. Potential Ether ETF issuers would love to be able to stake their Ether: The staking rewards would make an Ether ETF more attractive, and might provide some revenue to the issuer.
6. And they originally proposed that, but then “eliminated plans” for staking from their filings, presumably because the SEC glared at them meaningfully.
7. So Ether ETFs will launch without staking, so they won’t pay “interest,” which will make them a bit less economically attractive than holding Ether directly and participating in staking.

Fine. But. It seems to me that Ether ETFs have a crucial advantage here. _They are securities_. A spot Ether ETF just is a security. It is registered with the SEC. It is issued by a company — Fidelity, Ark — whose whole business is issuing SEC-registered securities. (Specifically, public _funds_, but [those are securities](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubWZhYWx0cy5vcmcvd3AtY29udGVudC91cGxvYWRzLzIwMTMvMDkvQ2l0aS00MC1BY3QtRnVuZHMtV2hpdGUtUGFwZXItSnVseS0yMDEzLTIucGRm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bcfc111a9) too.) 

We [talked last week](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35478826.273787/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMTUvYW1jLXJvZGUtdGhlLW1lbWUtcmFsbHk_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDUyMzI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNTIzJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Be8296d5a) about BlackRock Inc.’s blockchain-based money market fund, BUIDL. I think BUIDL is really interesting. BUIDL, as far as I can tell, is 

- a stablecoin,
- that pays interest.

There are other, bigger stablecoins. They tend to be issued by crypto-y companies (Circle, Tether). They don’t pay interest. Probably the issuers would like to pay interest, for customer-service and competitive reasons. But “a stablecoin that pays interest” is, in the view of the SEC, a security, and even if the crypto-y issuers _wanted_ to register their coins as securities they’d probably have a hard time with the SEC. Whereas BlackRock is BlackRock. It can just do that. BUIDL is institutional-only, not a public fund, but give it time. I wrote:

> The _most natural_ issuer for a large-scale stablecoin that can operate legally in the US and attract institutional users is _a mutual fund company_, because the essential technology — “we take your dollar, promise to give it back, invest it in Treasury bills and pay you most of the interest” — _is_ a money market mutual fund.

I think there is an analogy to spot Ether ETFs. Right now, those issuers are not going to be able to offer a public Ether ETF with staking rewards, because the whole Ether ETF thing is new and the SEC is glaring at them. The SEC is glaring, not issuing enforcement actions, so I don’t know exactly what the objection is. Presumably it has to do with the security of the staking system, the ETFs’ control of their assets, something like that.

But those issues are probably solvable, and the spot Ether ETFs have already solved the harder US regulator issue, which is: _They are packaging Ether in an SEC-registered security._ Meanwhile every _other_ way to get staking rewards from Ether — staking with a crypto exchange or a decentralized platform, etc. — has _not_ solved that issue. If you hold Ether yourself and deposit them with a crypto exchange to earn staking rewards, the SEC might eventually go after the exchange for issuing unregistered securities. If the SEC has its way, ultimately, nobody will be able to offer Ethereum staking rewards outside of a security. But Ethers in an ETF are inside a security!

Shen goes on:

> At the same time, many industry advocates believe that the removal of staking plans among ETF issuers is actually a net positive for the industry, where the goal is a financial system that is decentralized rather than dependent on a small number of intermediaries.
> 
> “Staked Ether being part of ETFs could have been a big centralizing force,” said Leo Mizuhara, founder of decentralized-finance institutional asset manager Hashnote. “For example, the amount of Bitcoin now in custody at Coinbase is enormous because of the ETF phenomenon. A similar thing could have happened with ETH staking.” ...
> 
> The fact that ETF issuers won’t be staking Ether likely aligns with Ethereum’s goals and will help protect the second-largest cryptocurrency from a “long-term institutional takeover,” said GSR’s Rudick.

Doesn’t that passage _mean_ “of course the SEC should approve staking in Ether ETFs”? Doesn’t the SEC _want_ Ether to be centralized and under the control of SEC-regulated securities issuers?
