
## SEC v. crypto

A pretty standard story in crypto is:

1. Crypto in general, and Crypto Project X in particular, are _building something._ Each crypto project is working to achieve some vision of the future of finance or communications or media or wireless networking or whatever, and crypto collectively — the aggregate of those projects — is moving toward some loosely shared vision of a future of decentralized ownership, censorship resistance, etc.
2. By buying tokens of Crypto Project X, you are betting on the success of whatever they are building: If the thing succeeds, the tokens will be worth more than you paid for them.
3. _Probably_ the people building Crypto Project X are _selling_ its tokens to raise money to build the thing, or doing something that rhymes with that. [[5]](imap://dave%40stucky%2Etech@mail.stucky.tech:993/fetch%3EUID%3E.INBOX%3E4839#footnote-5)

This is not the only story in crypto; there is another common story that [goes like](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDMtMTgvc2xvcmctaXMtc29ycnktaGUtYnVybnQtc2xlcmY_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQwODI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDA4JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B42a7c411) "someone created some tokens as a joke and now they are worth billions of dollars." But the one I laid out above is important. For one thing, it describes a lot of big crypto projects. Also, though, it would be hard to _care_ about crypto if it _wasn't_ trying to build something. "Dogecoin is a joke and if you buy it it might go up" is, I think, a very interesting fact about modern finance, but you'd feel silly devoting your life to it. _[Read Write Own: Building the Next Era of the Internet](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly9yZWFkd3JpdGVvd24uY29tLw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B91d5cd2c)_ is the name of venture capitalist Chris Dixon's book about crypto, and if you are a venture capitalist "the next era of the internet" is a better thing to back than "a joke about a dog."

The problem with this story, though, is that Crypto Project X's tokens sure sound like they are _securities_ under US law. A [security is](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDctMTQvcmlwcGxlLWlzLWEtc2VjdXJpdHktYW5kLWl0LWlzbi10P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B22f66717) "an investment of money in a common enterprise with profits to come solely from the efforts of others," and what I laid out above — Crypto Project X is a group of people building a thing, they raise money by selling tokens, and you buy tokens hoping to make money if their thing succeeds — is that.

US securities law exists mostly to prevent swindling in the sale of securities. This creates several problems for crypto:

1. Some crypto projects are in fact swindles, and securities law is bad for them.
2. The main way that the law prevents swindles is by requiring disclosure by securities issuers, and the disclosure rules are not well adapted to crypto, meaning that even a non-swindle crypto project will have a hard time registering its tokens and complying with US law.
3. The law empowers the US Securities and Exchange Commission to regulate securities, and [the SEC _hates_ crypto](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDktMTMvY3J5cHRvLXdhbnRzLXNvbWUtc2VjLXJ1bGVzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9ecad56b) and does not do anything to make registration easy or even possible.
4. Most critically, perhaps, the law also regulates securities _exchanges_, and it is hard for a crypto exchange to register with the SEC as a securities exchange. So the SEC can [go after crypto exchanges](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMDcvd2hlbi1pcy1hLXRva2VuLW5vdC1hLXNlY3VyaXR5P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B32ccf387) for illegally listing crypto tokens that are securities.

And the SEC has done that, [suing Coinbase Global Inc.](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMDYvdGhlLXNlYy1jb21lcy1mb3ItY3J5cHRvP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B0a9e393c) and other crypto exchanges for operating illegal securities exchanges.

This really is an existential problem for crypto in the US, and the industry's response has been to argue that these crypto tokens are not securities. The leading form of this argument goes something like this:

- A security is an "investment contract," and there is no _contract_ between you and Crypto Project X. Sure they say they will build the project, and you expect them to, and that's why you invested. But you never signed a contract; if they just run off with your money you can't sue. Therefore, not a security.
- Even if there _is_ some sort of contractual arrangement between you and Crypto Project X, the _token_ is not a security. The security is something like "the token plus the other arrangements and expectations you have with Crypto Project X." But the token is not the contract; [the token is](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDctMTcvYnJhbmNoZXMtbWFrZS1iYW5rLXJ1bnMtaGFyZGVyP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd76de150) "little more than [an] alphanumeric cryptographic sequence." Maybe Crypto Project X issued a security, but _secondary market_ trading in the token — people buying and selling it on an exchange — is not a securities transaction, so crypto exchanges are not securities exchanges.

I have never found these arguments especially persuasive; to me, [these tokens are analogous to stock in companies](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDctMTQvcmlwcGxlLWlzLWEtc2VjdXJpdHktYW5kLWl0LWlzbi10P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C22f66717), and secondary trading in Meta Platforms Inc. stock is obviously a securities transaction even though none of the money goes to Meta. (A share of stock is also, trivially, "little more than an alphanumeric cryptographic sequence," an entry in a computer database: It's what the database entry _represents_ that makes it a security.)

But last July a federal judge in New York was persuaded, [issuing a puzzling ruling](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDctMTQvcmlwcGxlLWlzLWEtc2VjdXJpdHktYW5kLWl0LWlzbi10P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96D22f66717) in the SEC's case against Ripple Labs Inc. finding that Ripple's XRP token is mostly not a security. I thought that perhaps I had it all wrong, and crypto tokens really are a get-out-of-securities-law-free card: You can raise money for your business by selling quasi-stock and calling it a token, you can do as much fraud as you want, and the SEC can't do anything about it.

Since then, though, the SEC has been on a winning streak against crypto. Shortly after the Ripple decision, another New York federal judge [issued a decision](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMDMvdGVycmEtaXMtdXN1YWxseS1hLXNlY3VyaXR5P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MDgyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQwOCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8dae385d) in the SEC's case against Terraform Labs and its founder Do Kwon, finding, no, of course Terra's tokens are securities. And last month, a different New York federal judge [ruled that the SEC's case against Coinbase](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDMtMjcvc2VjLXN1aXQtYWdhaW5zdC1jb2luYmFzZS1jYW4tZ28tZm9yd2FyZC1qdWRnZS1ydWxlcz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDA4MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MDgmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Be3e4c147) can go forward: "The 'crypto' nomenclature may be of recent vintage," she wrote, "but the challenged transactions fall comfortably within the framework that courts have used to identify securities for nearly eighty years."

Here is [her opinion](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly9hc3NldHMuYndieC5pby9kb2N1bWVudHMvdXNlcnMvaXFqV0hCRmRmeElVL3I3eDdIRjlrNTdpZy92MA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B88f22687), which strikes me as thorough and straightforward, and which surveys several other cases reaching similar results, more or less ignoring the Ripple decision. Coinbase [had argued](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDEtMTgvY29pbmJhc2UtdHJhZGVzLWJlYW5pZS1iYWJpZXM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQwODI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDA4JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B7d876f55) that crypto tokens were like Beanie Babies: speculative investments, but not speculative investments _in a business_. The judge rejected that argument, writing that "unlike in the transaction of commodities or collectibles (including the Beanie Babies discussed during the oral argument), which may be independently consumed or used, a crypto-asset is necessarily intermingled with its digital network — a network without which no token can exist."

And then last week the SEC won its jury trial against Terra. The [Wall Street Journal reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud3NqLmNvbS9maW5hbmNlL2N1cnJlbmNpZXMvZG8ta3dvbi1sb3N0LXRvLXRoZS1zZWMtdGhlLXUtcy1pcy1waWxpbmctdXAtb3RoZXItY3J5cHRvLXdpbnMtdG9vLTZjMTJiZGRlP21vZD1ocF9saXN0Y19wb3My/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2b9e991d):

> After a two-week civil trial, a New York jury agreed with the SEC's claims that Kwon and his firm, Terraform Labs, defrauded investors by misleading them about the stability of TerraUSD, a so-called stablecoin designed to maintain a value of $1. Kwon had claimed that TerraUSD would "self-heal" if its value ever dropped below the peg.
> 
> The decision was the latest in a series of federal court wins bolstering regulators' efforts to force the freewheeling industry to comply with the same laws that govern the stock and bond markets. 

In some sense, the Terra result was obvious once the judge allowed the case to go forward: If you think that Terra's tokens were _securities_, then _of course_ you are going to find that Terra did _securities fraud_. This is in part because there is a lot of evidence that Kwon and Terraform were lying to investors about important facts of the Terra ecosystem, but there is also the more straightforward fact that [Terra crashed](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDUtMTEvdGVycmEtZmxvcHM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQwODI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDA4JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd7bfceaa) and incinerated a lot of investor money. If (1) you call a thing a "stablecoin," (2) its value drops to [$0.026](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY29pbmRlc2suY29tL3ByaWNlL3RlcnJhdXNkLw/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9f1ec489) and (3) it is a security, then (4) you're going to get sued for securities fraud and (5) you are going to lose.

Or as SEC Enforcement Director Gurbir Grewal put it in [a statement after the verdict](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2VjLmdvdi9uZXdzL3N0YXRlbWVudC9ncmV3YWwtc3RhdGVtZW50LTA0MDQyNA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B988cb4af):

> Through these deceptions, the defendants caused devastating losses for investors and wiped out tens of billions of market value nearly overnight. For all of crypto's promises, the lack of registration and compliance have very real consequences for real people.

Last year, as the SEC accelerated its crypto crackdown, I [wrote about its timing](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34967840.279823/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDItMTMvdGhlLXNlYy1jcmFja3MtZG93bi1vbi1jcnlwdG8_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQwODI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDA4JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd1b5c01a). It seemed to me that cracking down on crypto in the wake of a crypto collapse was arguably bad regulation (better to prevent the collapse!) but good realpolitik:

> In 2021, if the SEC thought your token was a security and you thought it wasn't, you could go to court to argue about it, and try to convince a judge that the SEC was wrong on the law. You might win, who knows. … But in 2023, the SEC can go to court and say to a judge "we need to protect investors from unregistered crypto securities offerings, because _look at how many of them are frauds that went bankrupt_," and while that _legal_ argument is no better than it was in 2021, it is much more _persuasive_ now. At some emotional level the debate is "we need to stop fraudsters" versus "we need to allow for innovation," and the fraud/innovation balance has shifted a lot in recent months.

Well, now crypto is booming again, but the memory of all those frauds is still pretty fresh, and the SEC has notched some important wins.

[5] E.g., they are building the thing on the cheap without raising money, but they *have* a lot of the tokens, and if the thing succeeds those tokens will make them rich.
