
## Parallaxes

Last year I blurbed Gary Sernovitz's novel, [_The Counting House_](https://www.uno.edu/unopress/the-counting-house), whose main character is the chief investment officer of a fictional university endowment. (I really liked it - it is not for everyone, but I think it is probably for a lot of Money Stuff readers.) Much of the book consists of somewhat comical pitch meetings, in which managers of hedge funds and private equity funds and lending businesses try to convince the CIO to invest some of the endowment's money with them. The CIO is jaded: He has heard all this stuff before. There are only so many ideas, and he keeps hearing versions of them. He knows the weak points of each of them, knows before he asks the questions what the answers will be. The book is among other things a survey of the popular ideas in alternative investments in 2023, how they are pitched and what their flaws are.

Here's [a Wall Street Journal story](https://www.wsj.com/finance/investing/tax-whiz-strange-hustle-wall-street-d51ddbc6) about Andy Lee, who runs Parallaxes Capital, an investment firm that buys tax receivables agreements. His limited partners say stuff like this:

> As Lee pitches TRA holders, he educates potential investors. "I got the deck sent to me and at first I didn't really understand what this was," said Gilbert Calderon, chief investment officer at M4 Capital Management, a single-family office in Chicago known for buying esoteric investments. M4 eventually signed on.

That's what you want! "I got the deck sent to me and at first I didn't really understand what this was," conditional on eventually understanding it, is ideal. I mean in the sense that you might be getting an uncorrelated source of returns, but also in the sense that you will have a little treat, some entertainment in your workday, a pitch meeting that, for once, will feel new. "We do private equity rollups of middle-market companies," six people pitch you every day, but you only get so many TRA guys. Possibly only one TRA guy.

Meanwhile the other side of the trade - the people with tax receivables agreements that Parallaxes wants to buy from them - are similarly attractively confused:

> Lee often starts with cold outreaches to people with TRAs who are surprised to hear from him. One company founder responded to Lee's pitch with a cry laughing emoji. "I don't know what a TRA is, so probably not for me," the founder said.
> 
> Lee had the public financial filings to prove the founder had a TRA and a price Parallaxes would pay for its future cash flows. Through thousands of conversations and one-on-one deals like these, Parallaxes has invested more than $300 million across four funds. It is currently raising two more.

Again, that's what you want! If you are in the business of buying _____s from people who don't know that they have _____s, or what a _____ is, they are probably not going to drive a hard bargain, no matter what goes in that blank. "I'll give you $1 million for your TRA." "I do not have a TRA and have never heard of such a thing." "Then this $1 million is found money isn't it?" "Sure where do I sign." 

As it happens, we have [talked about TRAs](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-08-30/sculptor-is-full-of-conflicts) before, when Sculptor Capital Management Inc. was in a hostile takeover fight involving, among other things, its TRA. Basically if you are a founder or early employee of a private partnership, and then later it goes public, you will end up converting your partnership shares into shares in a public corporation, which will trigger immediate taxes for you and tax savings for the company over, often, 15 years. The norm is for the company to pay you most of those tax benefits (typically 85%) as they are realized; realizing them means mostly the company having enough taxable income to take advantage of the tax savings. So a TRA is a quasi-debt instrument of a public company, one that doesn't trade and that has unusual triggers. So if you sell this weird illiquid bond-ish thing to Parallaxes, you should expect to sell it at a big discount, and Parallaxes makes its money by figuring out which TRAs will pay out and buying them at a discount.

As is often the case with weird corporate derivatives trades, though, this is _really_ a bet on merger activity. The Journal reports:

> Parallaxes's first two funds have returned about 15% annually, according to investors. Later funds have done better because some companies whose TRA rights they owned were acquired and the TRAs were paid out early.

TRAs often have acceleration provisions that say that if the company gets acquired then the TRA gets paid out all at once, at maximally favorable assumptions, rather than over 15 years and only if there's taxable income. So if you buy a 15-year TRA at a 15% yield and all it gets paid out next year, that's where you make the real money.

TL;DR IT IS WISE TO ONLY INVEST IN WHAT YOU UNDERSTAND!

## Everything is securities fraud: OpenAI

I sometimes write "everything is securities fraud" as a shorthand for a [particular weird argument](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-02-03/goldman-sachs-goes-to-supreme-court-hedge-funds-won-on-gamestop-kkpoe6ws) about how modern US legal dynamics transmute every bad action taken by a public company into securities fraud, but never mind that. A simpler story is that if the board of directors of a company (public or private) puts out a public statement saying "turns out our chief executive officer is a big liar," _somebody_ is going to think that's securities fraud. Whatever the CEO was lying about was _probably_ material to the company - otherwise why would the board care? - and you've got to at least look into it.

This isn't quite that, but [the Wall Street Journal reports](https://www.wsj.com/tech/sec-investigating-whether-openai-investors-were-misled-9d90b411):

> The Securities and Exchange Commission is scrutinizing internal communications by OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman as part of an investigation into whether the company's investors were misled.
> 
> The regulator, whose probe hasn't previously been reported, has been seeking internal records from current and former OpenAI officials and directors, and sent a subpoena to OpenAI in December, according to people familiar with the matter. That followed the OpenAI board's decision in November to fire Altman as CEO and oust him from the board. At the time, directors said Altman hadn't been "consistently candid in his communications," but didn't elaborate. …
> 
> Some of the people familiar with the investigation described it as a predictable response to the former OpenAI board's claim in its November statement. One of the people said that the SEC hasn't pointed to any specific statement or communication by Altman that it has deemed misleading.

Right, maybe they'll find a "specific statement or communication" _to investors_ that was misleading, and he'll get in trouble; probably they won't. But if the board of directors of a giant company fires the CEO for the stated reason that he was _not candid_, the SEC really does have to look into it.

"A giant company," I said; not necessarily a _public_ one. "The SEC enforces laws that forbid people from misleading investors, regardless of whether fundraisers seek capital in public or private markets," notes the Journal, correctly. Still there are some relevant differences between OpenAI and most companies:

1. OpenAI's stock does not continuously trade in public markets, so its CEO could go around lying about lots of stuff without _tricking investors into buying stock_. If you are the CEO of a public company and you go on television and say "we have built a superintelligent robot that can cure cancer," people will buy your stock, the stock will go up, and if it turns out you were lying, they will sue you for fraud. If you are the CEO of a private company and you do that, nobody will trade the stock, because they can't. If you then try to raise money by selling stock to investors two weeks later, and you send them a private placement memo saying "we have not built a superintelligent robot, we're not even working on cancer, our CEO was just letting off steam on TV," and then they buy the stock, they weren't misled, were they? This is very much not legal advice, don't do it, but the point is that _every public statement_ by a public-company CEO is risky, while private companies have more limited investment-related communications.
2. In a typical _private_ company, and particularly in a typical _tech startup_, if the CEO is lying to the board of directors, he is also lying to his investors, because ordinarily the board will include several representatives of the venture capital firms that invest in the business. So if the board feels misled, the investors probably feel misled, because they're the same people. That's not the case here. In fact, it is exactly the opposite here: OpenAI's [description of its corporate structure](https://openai.com/our-structure) says "the board remains majority independent," and "independent directors do not hold equity in OpenAI." (Microsoft Corp., OpenAI's biggest investor, is represented by [an observer on the board](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-05/microsoft-picks-dee-templeton-as-openai-board-observer), but has no voting rights, and even the observer seat came after Altman's firing and unfiring.) So in some sense the board of directors was a good group for Altman to mislead: They weren't investors!
3. I continue to find it funny and relevant that, at the top of [OpenAI's operating agreement](https://openai.com/our-structure), it warns investors: "It would be wise to view any investment in OpenAI Global, LLC in the spirit of a donation, with the understanding that it may be difficult to know what role money will play in a post-[artificial general intelligence] world." I still don't know what Altman was supposedly not candid about, but whatever it was, how material can it possibly have been _to investors_, given what they signed up for? "Ooh he said it cost $50 million to train this model but it was really $53 million" or whatever, come on, the investors were donating money, they're not sweating the details.

## Everything is securities fraud: JBS

On the other hand, the general idea of "everything is securities fraud" is that if investors care about a thing, and the company says misleading stuff about the thing, then that's securities fraud. _Traditionally_, investors cared about things like profits, and companies sometimes cooked their books to show misleading profit numbers, and that was traditional securities fraud. But the modern theory understands that investors care about lots of things that could impact the company's business - its policies for [securing customer data](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-10-31/bad-passwords-are-securities-fraud), its [treatment of its employees](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-02-13/santander-didn-t-pay-its-non-debt), its [treatment of its whales](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2018-09-21/seaworld-s-strange-securities-fraud) - and misleading investors about any of those things could be fraud.

In the modern world of environmental, social and governance (ESG) investing, it seems pretty uncontroversial to say that at least _some_ investors care about a company's environmental record. And thus lying about your environmental record gives investors - or regulators - a securities-fraud hook to sue you.

You could imagine some sort of world in which governments directly regulated companies' environmental behavior, in which people made collective judgments about climate trade-offs through a democratic process, governments made rules enacting those judgments, companies followed those rules, and people got the level of emissions that they wanted. It's one approach.

But I think that the US approach is, roughly, that people make rough collective judgments about climate trade-offs _through their ownership of ESG investment vehicles_, investment managers pressure companies to enact those judgments, companies respond to those pressures by making environmental promises, and US regulators [regulate those promises](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-03-22/the-sec-will-regulate-climate) and punish the companies when they are false. Environmental regulation through securities fraud. It does seem second-best? [Bloomberg News reports](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-02-28/ny-sues-world-s-top-meat-packer-jbs-over-climate-impact):

> New York state is suing JBS SA over allegations the world's biggest meat-packer misled "the public about its environmental impact."
> 
> New York Attorney General Letitia James said the meat producer has failed to provide a viable plan to meet a widely-advertised commitment to reach net zero emissions by 2040 and that it could not feasibly meet such a goal, according to a filing. The company "has made several misleading claims about its environmental impact, including pledges to curb deforestation and reduce its greenhouse gas emissions," a statement from the attorney general's office said.
> 
> Several companies across different industries have made net zero commitments over the past few years amid growing pressure from investors, regulators and environmental groups. Still, many of them are yet to provide a clear pathway for decarbonization. Climate-washing claims against business have also become more usual, with most cases being originated in the US.

Right. I will say it is kind of strange to sue a company specifically for lying about whether it will have net zero emissions by 2040. It's only 2024! How can you prove that?
