
In a Fallen World, There Will Be Rats on Your Ship: Espionage and the Christian Worldview

And so you have all these levels of protection, but at the end of the day, regardless of the assignment in our federal government, you're dealing with human beings and some of those human beings are going to turn out to be rats.

Now, something goes behind this is the fact that the United States government would not be filing these public charges unless the Department of Justice is going for the win here. They're going for the conviction. And furthermore, if you read the documents on the Department of Justice, there's something else like a ticking time bomb in this, and that is that the department is expecting to file further charges.

Now, as you're looking at that, you look at the pattern of previous kinds of indictments charges handed down related to this, it becomes noticeable that the word espionage is not used in at least the publicly released information from this indictment. But the activities that were described are the activities of espionage and spycraft. At this point, the very serious charges that were filed against Victor Manuel Rocha, former United States Ambassador, they are charges of being an illegitimate agent of a foreign government.

Now, that's not an insignificant charge, but one of the things to understand is that that is a step-up in the legal world in order to get to a far larger and more significant charge. And by the way, this might be a charge that is more easily proved in court more immediately, and that gets to another tangled question and a fallen world. And that is to what extent does the United States government want to expose its own information gathering, including how it gathered the information against Victor Manuel Rocha.

And so in the calculation of all of this, the State Department, the White House, the Department of Justice, they may all decide that it is in the nation's interest to go for one set of charges rather than another set of charges because not so much their concern is the exposure of this defendant, but rather the exposure of the intelligence gathering operation of the United States of America.

These are hardly insignificant issues for the government to weigh. There are some tantalizing bits of information in the documentation available through the website of the Department of Justice in this case, and also in terms of the coverage and the national conversation over the past, say, 48 hours. One of the issues that has come up has to do with this man who was of course for decades deeply embedded in the American security state. One of the big issues comes down to the fact that as he was talking to a man, he thought to be an agent of Cuba who turned out to be an American intelligence agent or an FBI agent, he was pointing and bragging that one particular operation was, in his words, "more than a grand glam." According to at least some American officials, it is still unknown exactly what that grand slam was. But, boy, is that a tantalizing phrase all of a sudden to emerge in this kind of recording.

The deception that is alleged that was undertaken by Mr. Rocha includes the fact that he was someone who was sympathetic communism, but he presented himself to the American government as an avowed enemy of communism.

Here's where you also just come in the Christian understanding to further confirmation that we can't read the human heart. So let's just put this in a Christian frame for a moment. Let's understand what this tells us about life in a sinful, fallen world. For one thing where you have power, where you have interests, you have incredible opportunity for corruption. And in a fallen world in which there are many who want to hide the truth and present a lie, and there are others trying to find out the truth under the cover of a lie, things get very convoluted, which is why espionage novels turn out to be so interesting.

And of course, one of the biggest realizations that came at the end of the Cold War is that those novelists, number one actually often came with a great deal of espionage background. So in one sense, they knew what they were talking about, but number two, they were not exaggerating. The truth turned out to be indeed stranger and more dangerous than fiction. But the Christian worldview also reminds us that there are people who will sell their souls for some interest. And here you have the interest being perhaps ideological. The man was talking to the person he thought was a Cuban agent, turned out to be an American agent. He was talking of his own government.

The government he had served as the United States Ambassador, he was speaking of the American government as the enemy. In a fallen world, there will be robbers, there will be thieves, there will be murderers, and yes, there will be traitors. And that's exactly what this man appears to be. But I'm using that term in the moral context. Is it true in the legal context? Well, I think that's another part of what is likely to be unfolding in future action by the Department of Justice.

I'm not speaking here in legal terms, I'm speaking in moral terms. What is alleged here is treason, acting against the interest of your own country. But I return to the fact that the Christian worldview also reminds us that we cannot read the human heart. We can't read someone's mind. And so in this very high stakes business of national security statecraft, you're looking at military plans, the most precious information held by a government. The fact is there are going to be rats on the ship. And that also means that in a fallen world, you have to have rat traps on your own ship. And it also means you have to do a certain level of espionage against your own people.

This may be packaged of security and background checks, but it is also true that some of the greatest failures in Spycraft throughout the history of the 20th century came with spy agencies failing to recognize double agents in their own midst.

Finally, on this issue in a fallen world, it also turns out that the closer you get to power, the more tempting becomes the betrayal. I underline again the fact this man was a United States ambassador appointed by a President of the United States and confirmed by the United States Senate.

This was someone with senior diplomatic rank. This was someone in charge of the American representation in Cuba. Not coincidentally. This is someone who sat on the National Security Council of the United States at one time. So as you're talking about treason and betrayal, here you're talking about it on an epic scale. And that brings us to final words on this issue. And as you're looking at the need for continual vigilance, that's certainly been underlined here. We're going to know more, but the fact that this is shocking is something that should just remind us of the fact that we don't really have a right to be shocked about a lot of things.

We may be shocked about the scale and the audacity of certain crimes, and that applies here, but the fact is we shouldn't be surprised that there are people trying to undertake these crimes.

One final issue from the Christian worldview, just think of this, in the Garden of Eden when Adam and Eve sinned against God by eating from the one tree that was restricted from them, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. It is not wrong. When even going back to the medieval period, Christian theologians described what took place in the garden in the fall, in the sin of Adam and Eve, not just as disobedience, but as treason.

There is, of course, more to the story of Genesis 3 than treason, but understood in this light, there certainly is not less there than treason in all of its sinfulness.
